## A101: Prehospital Communication

## ALL
  

**MEDICAL REPORT FORMAT:** EMS agencies and personnel should use the following **MIST-R “mister”** format when contacting area hospitals/medical control facilities with patient information:

A. Ambulance identifier i.e. (_Cincinnati R-46, Anderson Medic 6, Mason Medic 51_)

B. Estimated time of arrival to hospital, including destination, if applicable.

C. Patient's age and sex.

D. **M**echanism of injury or **M**edical Complaint

E. **I**njuries (physical exam findings) or **I**llness (history of present illness)

F. **S**igns (vital signs with notable changes if applicable

G. **T**reatment given and response to the treatments.

H. **R**esources (orders, security, etc.) & **R**epeat ETA

**II. REQUIRED NOTIFICATION CALL:** 
In addition to those circumstances which are governed by the individual sections of this protocol, a call **MUST** be initiated to the receiving facility (Notifications received via Communications/Dispatch Centers/Mobile Applications and/or radio are also acceptable):

A. When there is doubt about diagnosis, treatment, or disposition of the patient.

B. When the patient meets criteria under a time critical diagnosis the provider shall notify using **"ALERT"** terminology:

1. STEMI Alert

2. Stroke Alert

3. Sepsis Alert

4. Cardiac Arrest/ROSC

5. Trauma Alert Criteria as described in SB210 flow chart.

C. When it is believed that the patient may require resources immediately at bedside:

1. Imminent or complicated childbirth

2. Bariatric patient

3. CPAP Therapy

4. Combative/chemically restrained/physically restrained patient

5. Security Personnel

D. During incidents deemed Mass Casualty Incidents (MCI) by the Incident Commander and/or Appendix C Management of Mass Casualty Incidents.

E. When transporting more than one pediatric patient from an incident to the same receiving facility

F. Contaminated or Highly Infectious Disease (HID) patients are being transported to emergency department.

**III. OPTIONAL NOTIFICATION CALL:**

A. When notification will expedite or improve patient care.

B. Whenever it is thought necessary by the EMS provider.

C. When a call is not possible, these protocols shall act as standing orders for procedures, which may be performed by certified EMS personnel and trainees under the direct supervision of certified EMS personnel. These protocols do not limit the activity of an EMS provider who is in direct contact with the medical control physician.

**NOTES:**

A. If the destination hospital has an established telemetry base, contact with that hospital should take precedence over contact with any other facilities.

B. An emergency department nurse at the medical control hospital may relay orders from the emergency physician in cases where it is impossible for the physician to come to the radio/telephone. It is not necessary to speak with a medical control physician concerning treatment modalities that are standing orders except if a question arises concerning the planned treatment.

C. Command Physicians may use discretion in the use of these protocols and order care, which, in their medical judgment, is in the best interest of the patient being provided with prehospital advanced life support care. The medications and procedures ordered must still fall within the approved Protocols and Procedures.

D. When giving an order for medication via radio/phone, the command physician or designee (i.e., RN) shall state the name of the drug, the dose, and the route by which that dose is to be delivered (e.g., Valium, 5 mg., slow I.V. push). The ALS provider is to repeat the exact orders back to the Command Physician before administering the drug.

E. Providers involved during Mass Casualty Incidents (MCI) should activate **_the Disaster Net_** as early into the incident as possible and utilize the **_Transportation Officer_** to facilitate patient notifications. Detailed information regarding this process is also available in Appendix C Management of Mass Casualty Incidents.

F. **_Base Station_** is defined as a hospital agreeing to accept EMS Medical Control responsibilities with an EMS phone that has recording capabilities, and these recordings need to be stored for a period of at least ninety (90) days. Some hospitals may elect not to assume EMS Medical Control and just want to be notified; therefore, EMS Command will default to the **_University of Cincinnati Medical Center._**

> Written with [StackEdit](https://stackedit.io/).
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEwMDA5NjI3OTNdfQ==
-->