## A102: Pharmacologic Assisted Intubation Administrative Recommendations

## Medic
  

**I. Pharmacologic-Assisted Intubation:**

A. Definition: **_Any_** use of medication(s) to facilitate endotracheal intubation.

**II. Administrative Recommendations:**

A. It is _strongly recommended_ that the service Medical Director adhere to the following administrative recommendations for the use of pharmacologic-assisted Intubation:

1. Medical direction with concurrent and retrospective oversight supervision.

2. Advanced training and continuing education designed to demonstrate initial, ongoing, and improving competence in the procedure, including supervised procedural experience.

3. Advanced training in airway management of patients who cannot be intubated, as well as the availability, and competence in the use of rescue airway methods in the event of failed pharmacologic-assisted intubation.

4. Standardized pharmacologic-assisted intubation protocols/procedure set forth by the services Medical Director, including the use of sedation, analgesia, and neuromuscular blockade.

5. Resources for drug storage and delivery.

6. Resources for continuous monitoring and recording of heart rate and rhythm, SpO2, and end-tidal carbon dioxide, before, during, and after pharmacologic-assisted intubation.

7. Appropriate training and equipment to confirm initial and verify ongoing tube placement, continuing quality assurance, quality control, performance review, and when necessary supplemental training.

## KY-Medic
  

**III.** Pharmacologic-assisted Intubation:

A. This is a restricted procedure. A service will require specific authorization from the board prior to utilization of this procedure and skill. This procedure is restricted and also requires State Medical Advisor approval.

**IV. Pediatric Pharmacologic-assisted Intubation:**

A. Advanced provider certification required:

1. Critical Care Transport Paramedic (CCP-C)

2. Flight Paramedic Certification (FP-C)

3. Certified Flight Registered Nurse (CFRN)
4. Other certification approved by the _Kentucky Board of EMS_ and the service Medical Director

> Written with [StackEdit](https://stackedit.io/).
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTQ1MzYxMjMzMV19
-->