## A104: Control of EMS at Scene of Emergency

## ALL
  

**I. Introduction**

A. One of the most difficult situations for the paramedic is that created by the arrival of a physician at the scene. A different set of responsibilities exists when that physician knows and has established a previous doctor-patient relationship with the patient as opposed to when no such relationship exists. Physicians who are part of the EMS system such as the service's medical director or on-line medical control physician are generally responsible for patient care.

**II. Physician Without Previous Doctor-Patient Relationship**

A. FOR A FULLY LICENSED PHYSICIAN WHO IS NOT A PART OF THE EMS SYSTEM TO ASSUME CONTROL AT THE SCENE OF AN EMERGENCY, ALL OF THE FOLLOWING MUST TAKE PLACE:

1. Proof of the physician's identity and current state licensure must be provided to the senior Medic/EMT.

2. The physician must agree to accompany the patient to the hospital.

3. The on-line medical control physician must be notified and agree to relinquish control to the on-scene physician. This can usually best be accomplished by having the medical control physician speak directly with the physician at the scene.

4. The physician at the scene must agree to sign his or her orders.

5. If the on-scene physician has not given orders or performed invasive interventions, and the ongoing care of the patient is within the scope of practice of the on-scene EMS crew, the EMS crew may release the on-scene physician and not require him/her to transport.

6. Nothing within this protocol prohibits an on-scene physician from assisting an EMS crew with carrying out their normal protocol treatment. Assistance of a physician on scene does not constitute a physician taking control of the scene.

**III. Physician with Previous Doctor-Patient Relationship**

A. As a general rule, it is desirable that the Medic/EMTs called to the scene of an emergency, even within a physician's office, perform an assessment and manage the patient just as would be done in any other location.

B. If the physician wishes to take control of the patient's management, he or she may do so if:

1. Communication is established between on-line medical control and the physician at the scene, and

2. The scene physician agrees to accompany the patient to the hospital.

C. If control of the emergency is assumed by the on-scene physician, then:

1. The physician’s license number will be recorded on the run report.

2. Orders within the scope of training and practice of the Medic/EMT will be carried out.

3. Orders outside the scope of training and practice of the Medic/EMT will be personally carried out by the on-scene physician.

4. The on-scene physician will sign his or her orders.

5. The on-scene physician must accompany the patient in the ambulance to the hospital unless released by the on-line medical control physician.

**IV. If control of the emergency is given to the on-scene physician, then the physician can only issue orders within the scope of training and practice of the Medic/EMT.**

**V. Any orders or procedures outside of the Medic/EMT’s scope of practice will have to be carried out personally by the on-scene physician.**

**Notes:**

A. In a disaster or multi-casualty situation, then the on-scene physician should use his best judgment about whether or not to accompany the patient to the hospital. It may be appropriate to stay at the scene and tend to the patients remaining. Generally, these decisions should be made in consultation with the medical control physician.

B. If the physician on the scene does not accompany the patient to the hospital, then responsibility for that patient will revert to the medical control physician.

## KY-ALL
  
**VI. On-Scene Medical Personnel**

A. The medical care provided at the scene is the responsibility of the highest level of EMS provider who has responded by usual dispatch system to that scene. Passersby who stop to help, even though possibly more highly trained than the system providers, may not assume responsibility (except as outlined below) but may be allowed to help in care at the discretion of the lead EMS provider and assuming they have proof of licensure.

B. When an EMS provider, under medical control (on- or off-line), arrives at the scene of an emergency, the provider acts as the agent of medical control.

C. Any healthcare provider (physician, physicians assistant, registered nurse, nurse midwife, non-KY licensed EMS provider, etc.) who is not an active member of the responding EMS unit, and who is either at the scene at the time of EMS’ arrival, or arrives after an EMS unit provider has initiated care, and who desires to continue to participate, should be put in touch with the on-line medical control physician.

D. At no time should an EMS provider provide care outside of their scope of training and/or protocols.

E. In the event that a Mass Casualty Incident (MCI) is declared, all providers should follow the Mass Casualty Incidents Uniform Prehospital MCI Procedure outlined in this document or similar approved Incident Command System.


> Written with [StackEdit](https://stackedit.io/).
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTg1MzA3MzQ5MiwxNzI3Mzg2ODkzXX0=
-->