
## A105: Determination of Death / Termination of Resuscitation

## ALL
  

I. Basic and/or Advanced cardiac life support must be started on all patients who are found apneic and pulseless, UNLESS:

A. A valid Do Not Resuscitate order is presented as defined in the Do Not Resuscitate Protocol, OR

B. The patient’s body is unable to undergo resuscitative measures (CPR, ventilatory management,) such as decapitation, hemicorpectomy, severe and complete crush injury, or burned beyond resuscitative capability/recognition. Isolated penetrating trauma should rarely be considered incompatible with life OR

C. The victim shows signs of rigor mortis (in a warm environment), dependent lividity, or decomposition.

D. During a mass casualty incident, (MCI) the patient is designated as deceased or expectant by the locally accepted MCI triage protocols. **Such patients should be reevaluated as resources allow**.

## Medic
  
E. If the patient has either blunt or penetrating trauma, refer to protocol S509.

## ALL
  

II. Resuscitation efforts may be terminated by the prehospital personnel under the following circumstances:

A. If resuscitation was started prior to the discovery of an approved DNR directive OR

B. If upon further examination, the patient meets the determination of death criteria above OR

C. If the following Medic conditions are met
## Medic
  

III. Medics may terminate resuscitative efforts and not transport patients under active CPR if all of the following exist:

A. Good contact between the paramedic unit and the medical control physician.

B. Successful airway management and medication administration consistent with other protocols in this document.

C. At least 30 minutes of resuscitative efforts

D. NO sustained return of spontaneous circulation at any time (palpable pulse greater than 60 beats per minute for at least one five-minute period).

E. NO spontaneous respiration: eye opening, motor response, or other neurologic activity at the time stopping resuscitation is contemplated.

F. The cardiac rhythm is NOT persistent or recurrent ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia.

G. All paramedics and the medical control physician agree with termination of the resuscitation.

H. The suspected cause of the cardiac arrest must be something other than hypothermia, electrocution, lightning strike.

I. While patients who are pregnant may not themselves benefit from longer resuscitation, the unborn fetus may benefit from emergency c-caesarian section. Consequently, it is recommended to transport pregnant patients even if there has been no return of spontaneous circulation.
## ALL
  

IV. Post-termination Body Movement (a good faith effort to categorize the cause of death is reasonable)

A. Likely homicide – avoid body movement unless necessary for life safety; consider involving law enforcement and/or the coroners office.

B. Likely natural causes – body may be relocated as appropriate for the situation and public good.

C. Unclear cause – avoid disturbance unless necessary  for life safety; consider involving law enforcement and/or the coroner’s office.

## Medic
  

V. Termination of resuscitation (TOR) inside an ambulance

A. TOR enroute is reasonable if the patient meets criteria in section III.

B. After TOR, the ambulance should continue non-emergency to the destination hospital.

C. Body may be removed from the ambulance after TOR, assuming the ambulance is not the site of homicide.

D. Such instances should be exceedingly rare.
## ALL
**Notes:**

A. The purpose behind the termination of resuscitation in the field is to keep EMS unit’s in-service for emergencies instead of transporting non-salvageable patients under resuscitative efforts. This protocol provides a method for terminating resuscitation in hopeless cases.

B. Studies have shown that manual CPR during transport is usually not performed well even with the best intentions. For adults with the current training and equipment that is available in the pre-  

hospital setting clearly demonstrates that if a patient does not have a return of spontaneous circulation in the pre-hospital setting then they are very unlikely to have it after being transported to the ER. It is acceptable to have longer scene times in these cases to prevent unnecessary transport.

C. It is good to contact medical control for special situations that need further exploration.

D. Rigor mortis takes a variable amount of time to begin depending upon the physical condition of the deceased prior to death as well as the temperature of the environment. The face and neck begin to stiffen between two and five hours after death. After seven to nine hours, rigor mortis will affect the arms and chest. By twelve hours after death, rigor mortis is usually firmly established. Post-mortem lividity (the pooling of blood at the dependent portions of the body) will occur unless the victim has suffered a large blood loss. About one to two hours after death, lividity will begin and peak at about six hours.

E. Leaving a deceased person at home after termination of resuscitation efforts may present logistical challenges with what to do with the body. The Protocol Committee strongly encourages conversations between Fire/EMS and police departments to establish procedures for this situation.

  

_If one pronounces an infant or child dead in the field, here are some helpful suggestions:_

A. Pick a quiet environment to inform the family and try to be on the family’s level. Sit if they are sitting and match their tone of voice and posture.

B. Refer to the child by his/her name.

C. Use concrete words such as “is dead” or “has died.” Euphemisms are not “gentler” and may lead to confusion.

D. Parents and caregivers often do not want to hear the details of the resuscitation. Instead, offer statements such as “Everything was done for your child.” or, “We made every effort to help your child.”

E. Avoid statements like “I know how you feel.” Instead, use words like “This must be so difficult.”

F. Be compassionate and non-accusatory, even if you think there may have been child maltreatment. Those issues are to be worked out later and not by you.

G. If a statement of sympathy feels right, do not be afraid to express it. “I am so sorry.” Families remember kindness and sincerity.

H. Take care of yourself, find a way to decompress and discuss what you have experienced. Few things are as emotionally draining and burnout inducing as witnessing the death or suffering of a child.

## KY-ALL
  

VI. Determination of Death - Discontinuance of Resuscitation by a Paramedic

A. An EMS provider may discontinue resuscitative efforts/ CPR if, prior to transport:

1. The patient has suffered cardiac arrest.

2. The patient meets all of the following criteria:

i. Unresponsiveness

ii. Apnea

iii. The absence of a palpable pulse at the carotid site

iv. Bilaterally fixed and dilated pupils,

3. ONE OF THE FOLLOWING:

i. The EMS provider is presented a standard form or identification evidencing a desire not to be resuscitated in accordance with KRS 311.623 (DNR regulation) or 201 KAR 9:470 (MOST regulation)

  

**OR**

ii. The EMS provider discovers that one (1) or more of the following factors or conditions exist:

a. Lividity of any degree

b. Rigor mortis of any degree (In the non-hypothermic patient)

c. The presence of venous pooling in the body

d. Damage or destruction of the body which is incompatible with life (such as decapitation, hemicorpectomy, evisceration of heart or lungs, body burned beyond recognition, or injury that does not allow resuscitative efforts to be performed)

B. Paramedic may discontinue resuscitative efforts/ CPR if, prior to transport:

1. The patient has suffered cardiac arrest.
2. The Paramedic has attempted and documented the resuscitative efforts specified in the Asystole Protocol, including successful airway management, IV/IO access, and IV/ IO administration of epinephrine.

3. The resuscitative efforts were unsuccessful after at least 20 minutes of ALS care; and

4. The patient meets the following criteria:

a. Unresponsiveness

b. Apnea

c. The absence of a palpable pulse at the carotid site

d. Bilaterally fixed and dilated pupils

e. Asystole determined in two (2) leads on an electrocardiograph, except in cases of trauma (Note: Slo, wide-complex agonal complexes are considered a variant of asystole).

5. The paramedic shall make reasonable efforts to contact the on duty MEDICAL CONTROL to discuss the case and intention to discontinue resuscitative efforts, and may then pronounce the patient dead.

C. If a paramedic is not available on scene and unable to respond in a timely manner, but another qualified EMS provider (EMT/ AEMT) has performed all the above resuscitative efforts that are within their scope of practice including at least 20 minutes of resuscitative effort, and the requirements of section IV.B.4 above are met (excluding EKG determination), and

1. Arrest was not witnessed by EMS

2. ROSC was not achieved in the field.

3. No AED shocks were delivered

4. The EMT/AEMT shall contact online medical control to request CPR, ventilation, and drug/fluid/electrical therapy be withheld based on medical futility. In this case, the coroner shall be called and make the final pronouncement of death. The EMS provider must remain with the patient until death is pronounced and observe for any changes in condition.

D. If the patient’s medical power of attorney or legally authorized medical decision maker* is present on scene and wishes to revoke consent for further treatment (ie resuscitative efforts), medical control shall be contacted for consultation and orders. The medical control physician may order any treatment being provided to be withheld in accordance with the wishes of the medical decision maker speaking for the patient. If the patient remains in cardiac arrest, the patient may be pronounced dead by a paramedic if the patient meets the criteria laid out in VI.A or VI.B above. If a paramedic is not on scene, the crew must remain on scene and evaluate for any changes in condition until the jurisdiction’s cornor or a healthcare provider authorized to pronounce death arrives on scene and pronounces the patient dead. (*Authority for decision making when the patient is not able to express their own wishes is granted to the following in decending order (KRS 311.631): legal guardian, medical power of attorney, spouse, adult children, parents, closest reasonably available next of kin.)

E. The EMS provider shall document all items required on the run report including the usual patient assessment, medical history and surrounding events information. It is especially important to note:

1. Body position and location where discovered, including differences from when last seen alive

2. Patient condition when last seen alive

3. Clothing and condition of clothing

4. Condition of residence/business/location found

5. Statements made on scene by significant individuals

6. Any unusual circumstances

  

IN THE EVENT OF ANY UNCERTAINTY AS TO THE PATIENT STATUS, THE CREW IS TO INITIATE NORMAL RESUSCITATIVE EFFORTS.

> Written with [StackEdit](https://stackedit.io/).
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEzMTM2OTY3NzJdfQ==
-->