# Do Not Resuscitate Orders in the Field

## OH-ALL
  

**I. General**

A. In accordance with Ohio Revised Code Sections 2133.21-2133.26, providers will consider and honor all valid Ohio Do Not Resuscitate Orders/Identification.

B. There are two valid DNR orders:

1. DNR Comfort Care (DNRCC): effective as soon as an authorized healthcare provider signs the form.

2. DNR Comfort Care – Arrest (DNRCC-Arrest): does not become effective until a person experiences cardiac or respiratory arrest.

C. "DNR identification" means a standardized identification card, form, necklace, or bracelet that is of uniform size and design, that has been approved by the department of health pursuant to section 2133.25 of the Revised Code, bearing the Ohio DNR logo.

D. No other medical orders, directions, or other instructions should be written on a DNR order form. Anything written on the DNR order form other than the information required for completion of the DNR order form does not have to be followed by EMS or other health care providers.

**II. Protocol**

A. Individuals with either a DNRCC or DNRCC-Arrest, which is activated, **will** receive the following care:

1. Conduct an initial assessment

2. Perform basic medical care

3. Clear airway of obstruction or suction

4. If necessary, (for comfort of the patient) may administer oxygen, CPAP, or BiPAP

5. If necessary, (for comfort of the patient) may obtain IV access for hydration or pain medication to relieve discomfort, but not to prolong death

6. If possible, may contact other appropriate health care providers

B. Once the DNR protocol is activated, EMS personnel **will not**:

1. Perform CPR

2. Insert artificial airway adjunct (intubation, ventilator, etc.)

3. Administer medications with the intent of restarting the heart or breathing

4. Defibrillate, cardiovert, or initiate pacing

5. Initiate continuous cardiac monitoring

C. In the event a DNR is presented to EMS that is neither of the above (I.B.), then communication with a base hospital physician, EMS medical advisor, personal physician, physician on the scene, physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse I shall be established.

D. A DNR shall NOT BE HONORED where the patient is pregnant, where withholding CPR would terminate the pregnancy.

E. In the case of any doubt or reservation as to the validity or authenticity of any DNR, and absent authorization by a base hospital physician, EMS medical advisor, personal physician, physician on the scene, physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse I to withhold CPR, the Medic/EMT shall provide CPR to the patient and shall document the reasons for not complying with the DNR.

F. In the event resuscitation is initiated on a patient and then a valid DNR is subsequently identified, resuscitation may be terminated in compliance with that DNR. Documentation shall be made on the run sheet indicating the events that happened set forth in chronological order. In the event a DNR is identified after a patient has been intubated, the tube shall not be removed in the prehospital setting. If the initial resuscitation has restored cardiac rhythm, the patient should be transported to the nearest appropriate medical facility with no further procedures or pharmacological measures undertaken, except by authorization from the base hospital physician, medical advisor, or attending physician. Communication with a physician should be established.

G. When the DNR Comfort Care protocol is performed, the suggested documentation on the patient care report should include the following information:

1. The document identifying the DNR Comfort Care status of the patient.

2. The method of verification of the patient’s identity if any was found through reasonable efforts.

3. DNR Comfort Care or DNR Comfort Care-Arrest classification.

4. All actions taken to implement the DNR Comfort Care protocol.

5. All unusual events occurring enroute or on scene including interactions with family members, bystanders, or health care providers.
 

REFERENCE: A. Ohio Department of Health


> Written with [StackEdit](https://stackedit.io/).
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMjAxNzg2NzExM119
-->