
# Use of EMS for Emergent Interfacility Transfer

  ## ALL

**I. INTRODUCTION**

A. Occasionally an EMS unit may be utilized for an _emergent_ interfacility transfer. This should be reserved for patients in whom rapid transfer is _emergent_ or under “disaster” circumstances.

B. Hospitals should only use EMS for emergency interfacility transfers in cases where there is a time-dependent test or intervention available at the receiving facility (ex: coronary angiography for STEMI, endovascular therapy for large vessel occlusion stroke, trauma services) or in cases where a patient faces risk of loss of life/limb/function if transfer is delayed.

C. Interfacility transfers are subject to Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA) regulations.

1. EMTALA requires stabilization, to the best of the hospital’s ability, prior to transfer

a. Stabilization includes delivery for a female in active labor (as defined in O800)

b. Delivery in an Emergency Department is safer than delivery during transport

2. EMTALA requires the transferring physician to choose the appropriate level of care for transport.

3. This protocol does not prevent the transfer of unstable patients.

D. There is no “duty to act” for EMS to accept a transfer if EMS cannot provide the expected needs of the patient.

**II. PROTOCOL**

A. Perform a standard assessment (see protocol SB200) and confirm that EMS is an appropriate method of transfer based on patient’s current condition, anticipated needs, and EMS capabilities.

1. After assessment, EMS may request that hospital personnel accompany them during transport

2. In certain cases and after assessment, EMS may decline the transfer

B. Prior to departure, EMS must obtain:

1. Accepting physicians’ name

2. Accepting facility name and destination area

a. Any destination other than the ED must be agreed upon prior to leaving the transferring facility

3. Diagnosis and reason for transfer

4. Verification that the patient is aware of, and agrees to transfer (if able)

5. Results of all diagnostic testing (labs, imaging, etc.) obtained prior to transfer, or assurance that results are available electronically at the receiving facility.

C. EMS personnel must have physician written/signed orders for any treatments that do not fall under these protocols. During transport, EMS may follow verbal orders given by a registered nurse designated by the transferring physician.

1. EMS personnel may follow these orders to the limits of their scope of practice and training.

2. If the physician written/signed orders are beyond the scope of practice and/or training of the EMS personnel and there are no specialty personnel to accompany the EMS personnel, then the orders must be changed, or alternate transportation arranged for.

D. During transport, the lead paramedic retains primary decision-making and patient care authority.

E. Hospital personnel accompanying EMS for transport operate under the scope of practice and credentials approved by their hospital.

F. If there is a problem in route, it is usually appropriate to call the transferring facility. However, depending on the situation, it may be appropriate to call the receiving facility. This should be discussed before transfer.

  

**NOTES:**

A. Certain patients require higher level of care. For example, stroke patients after they have received thrombolytics (TPA, TNK, etc.) require much more frequent vital signs. It is important to discuss with the transferring facility any special requirements a patient may have.

B. Run reports should be prepared as normal.

C. Medical directors should consider reviewing these runs as part of QA/QI.

> Written with [StackEdit](https://stackedit.io/).
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTExMTAyNDAzN119
-->