
# Advanced Emergency Medical Technician (AEMT)

## ALL
  

**I. Purpose**

  

The scope of practice (SOP) for the AEMT includes all interventions within the SOP of the EMT as well as some interventions within the SOP of the Paramedic but not within that of the EMT. This protocol is intended to allow AEMTs, when approved to do so by their Fire Department and Medical Director, to utilize their full SOP without unnecessarily complicating the protocol set or adding unneeded redundancy.

## OH-ALL
  

**II. AEMT Scope of Practice**

A. The State of Ohio AEMT SOP includes all interventions designated for EMTs, herein labeled “ALL”.

B. The State of Ohio AEMT SOP includes the following interventions, which in this protocol set will be listed only in the section designated “MEDIC”:

1. Laryngoscopy for removal of airway obstruction

2. Tracheostomy tube replacement

3. Orotracheal intubation of the apneic patient

4. Orotracheal intubation of the pulseless and apneic patient

5. Dual lumen airway use for the apneic patient

6. Extraglottic airway use for the apneic patient.

7. Manual defibrillation

8. Cardiac monitor strip interpretation

9. Epinephrine administration via SQ or IM routes

10. Nitroglycerin administration (non-patient assisted)

11. Administration of aerosolized or nebulized medications (non-patient assisted)

12. Naloxone administration via ETT, IV, IM, or SQ routes

13. Administration of intranasal medications

14. Medication administration (see section C below)

15. Intravenous access and peripheral initiation

16. IV maintenance and fluid administration

17. Intraosseous needle insertion

18. Saline lock initiation

19. Peripheral IV blood specimens

20. Needle decompression of the chest

C. Medications approved for AEMT administration* (when instructed by the protocol):

1. Benzodiazepines

2. Bronchodilators

3. Buprenorphine

4. Dextrose in water

5. Diphenhydramine

6. Epinephrine 1 mg per 1 ml SQ/IM

7. Glucagon

8. Ketamine

9. Lidocaine for pain relief after IO needle insertion

10. Nalbuphine

11. Naloxone

12. Narcotics and other analgesics for pain relief

13. Nitrous oxide

14. Oral Ondansetron for 12 years or older

15. Sublingual nitroglycerine

16. Tranexamic Acid

* ODPS mandated medication list, per Ohio EMS Scope of Practice

  ## KY-ALL
    

D. The Commonwealth of Kentucky AEMT SOP includes all interventions designated for EMT’s, herein referred to as “ALL”.

E. The Commonwealth of Kentucky AEMT SOP includes the following interventions, herein labeled “MEDIC”.

  

1. IV access

2. Topical medication route

3. External jugular access

4. IO access and infusion

5. IV fluid warming/cooling equipment application and monitoring

6. IV medication administration bolus

7. Venous blood sampling

8. Blind insertion airway device (e.g. King, LMA, i-gel)

9. Gastric decompression monitoring and management

10. ECG acquisition

11. Utilize computer interpretation of diagnostic ECG for transport decision

12. Infusion pump monitoring/management of scope-approved meds and fluids

F. Medications approved by the Commonweath of Kentucky for AEMT administration (when instructed by protocol):

1. Non-medicated IV fluids (Normal saline and lactated ringers)

2. Infusion pump monitoring and management of scope-approved meds and fluids

3. Nitrous oxide for pain relief

4. Sub-lingual nitroglycerin for chest pain of ischemic origin

5. Dextrose solutions in water

6. Diphenhydramine (only for allergic reaction/anaphylaxis)

7. Epinephrine

8. Fentanyl citrate

9. Glucagon

10. Ketamine (analgesic)

11. Ketorolac tromethamine

12. Lidocaine for analgesic during IO insertion procedure

13. Midazolam (only for active seizures)

14. Morphine sulfate

15. Nalbuphine hydrochloride

16. Nitropaste

17. Obidoxime chloride

18. Ondansetron

19. Promethazine

## IN-ALL

  

G. The State of Indiana AEMT SOP includes all interventions designated for EMT’s, herein referred to as “ALL”.

H. The State of Indiana AEMT SOP includes the following interventions, herein labeled “MEDIC”.

1. IV access

2. IO access

3. Venous blood sampling

4. Suctioning- tracheobronchial of an intubated patient.

5. Medication administration via IV, IO, IN and subcutaneous routes.

6. Gastric decompression monitoring and management

7. Utilize computer interpretation of diagnostic ECG for transport decision

I. Medications approved by the State of Indiana for AEMT administration (when instructed by protocol):

1. Inhaled-monitor patient administered (i.e., nitrous oxide)

2. Glucagon

3. IV dextrose

4. Normal saline

5. Epinephrine (1mg/10mL) for cardiac arrest

6. Ondansetron  

7. Naloxone

8. Nitroglycerin sublingual for chest pain of suspected ischemic origin

## ALL
  

**III. Protocol**

A. In all cases, the AEMT may perform all tasks and interventions listed in the “ALL” section of this protocol set.

B. When a task or intervention that falls within the AEMT scope of practice is listed in the “MEDIC” section of a protocol being enacted, the AEMT may perform this task or intervention.

C. The AEMT must have received appropriate training and continuous education on the task or intervention in consideration.

D. The task or intervention must be approved by the AEMT’s Fire Department and Medical Director.

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTU4ODg3MTcyNF19
-->