# Highly Infectious Disease Transport

## ALL

  

**I. Inclusion**

A. Due to the variety of infectious pathogens, essentially any symptom can represent infectious disease (ID). Symptom-based inclusion criteria must be determined on a case-by-case basis during pandemic/epidemic. Among the most common are malaise, respiratory symptoms, gastrointestinal symptoms, fever (temp >100.4 F), and rash.

B. Multiple patients with similar symptoms may indicate ID (but can also represent toxin exposure).

C. For the purposes of this protocol ID refers to novel pathogens (e.g., SARS, MERS, Swine Flu, Ebola, etc) and certain more common situations (e.g., pandemic influenza). While correctly termed “ID”, this protocol is not intended to directly address common diseases (e.g., “a cold”, “strep throat”, UTI, etc).

**II. Protocol**

A. EMS provider safety is paramount. Response urgency should never supersede the use of situationally appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE).

B. Maximize information gathered from the dispatch center.

C. Appropriate PPE must be determined based on the nature of the pathogen.

1. For unknown pathogens, full skin coverage with a fluid impermeable barrier and N95 or higher respiratory protection is generally advisable.

2. At minimum, universal precautions with gloves, splash protections, and mucus membrane protection should be used.

3. Aerosol-generating procedures (e.g., intubation, suction, nebulized treatments, CPAP), when performed on ID patients, typically require N95 mask or higher protection.

D. Efforts should be made to minimize the number of providers exposed to potential ID.

1. Verbal assessment of the patient can often be performed at a distance. Thorough history, including recent travel and contact with sick persons, is essential.

2. When necessary, the patient should be approached by the minimum number of providers (in PPE) needed for appropriate care.

3. During transportation only the minimum number of providers needed for appropriate care should be in the patient care compartment. If possible, the driver’s compartment and patient care compartment should be physically separated.

E. Efforts should be made to minimize spread of infectious material.

1. Place simple surgical mask on the patient (NOT N95 mask) as tolerated (non-rebreather mask with oxygen flowing may be used under surgical mask).

2. Wrap the patient in a clean sheet.

3. Administer anti-emetics as appropriate.

F. Depending on the pathogen and patient condition, it may be appropriate to maximize ventilation in the patient care compartment during transport by opening windows and using non-recycling air conditioning.

G. Aeromedical Transport should not be utilized unless absolutely necessary and may not be available to certain ID patients.

H. Hospital pre-notification is always necessary with ID patients. In some circumstances, designated receiving facilities may be in place.

I. In some situations, local health department notification may be necessary.

J. PPE should worn until after transfer of care to the receiving facility.

K. PPE must be doffed, and decontamination of providers must be performed in an appropriate manner to avoid possible contamination during the doffing process.

L. Transport vehicle decontamination:

1. Some pathogens can remain active on various surfaces for prolonged periods.

2. Precisely which chemical is most appropriate will depend on the pathogen. This determination should be made with assistance from the medical director, local infection control specialists, and local health departments.

3. PPE similar to that worn during patient care should be worn during the decontamination process.

M. Appropriate disposal techniques for contaminated items will vary depending on the pathogen.

**notes:**

A. Universal precautions with all patient interactions are the foundation of infectious disease control.

B. EMS providers are significantly benefited by thorough, up to date vaccinations.

C. Departmental processes should be in place to minimize risk of sharps and bodily fluid exposure.

D. Departmental processes should be in place for post-infectious disease exposure reporting, evaluation, and monitoring.

E. EMS providers should always maintain awareness of the potential for infectious disease, with a heightened level of vigilance during times of pandemic/epidemic.

F. Common concepts of “Time, Distance, and Shielding” can be applied to ID.

G. If tight fitting respirators are to be employed (e.g., N95 masks, APRs, SCBA) appropriate fit testing must be conduct annually on the specific model used.

H. “Contact precautions” refers to gloves and gown/coverall; “droplet precautions” refer to simple surgical mask; “airborne” or “respiratory precautions” refers to N95 or higher protection.

I. EMS personnel should be alert to and report perceived “clusters” of patients with similar symptoms.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTg2Nzg2NzU0N119
-->