
# Hospital Status

## ALL

  

**I. Purpose**

A. The purpose of this protocol is to facilitate the timely communication of a hospital’s Emergency Department (ED) status and the subsequent request that EMS inform patients another medical facility may be better prepared to administer, more timely emergency care.

**II. Hospital Status Definitions**

A. Normal: the hospital’s ED and supporting resources are operating normally.

B. At Capacity: the hospital has determined the ED and supporting resources are fully committed (see routing decisions for exceptions).

C. Limited Operations: the hospital has normal capacity, but an area or resource is not available. (no CT or MRI, Cath Lab shut down, etc.).

D. **Closed: the hospital has activated its disaster plan due to an internal emergency, bomb threat, or other situation rendering it UNABLE to accept patients.**

**III. Protocol**

A. EMS personnel will continue to transport patients to a hospital reporting itself to be At Capacity or Limited Operations under the following circumstances:

1. The patient is unstable including, but not limited to having an unmanageable airway, CPR in progress, or having uncontrolled internal or external hemorrhaging; (all trauma patients will be transported to an appropriate trauma center)

2. The hospital At Capacity or Limited Operations has the specific services the patient needs (e.g., stroke, STEMI, OB patient, major burns)

3. Clinical judgement of EMS personnel determines increased transport time may place patient safety at risk.

4. EMS personnel have advised the patient that the patient’s preferred hospital is At Capacity and the patient still wishes to be transported.

B. This does not apply during mass casualty events.

  

Notes:

A. Once notified that a hospital is At Capacity or Limited Operations EMS personnel should be prepared to counsel patients on how hospital status may affect them.

B. Additional information can be found on The Health Collaborative website - http://healthcollab.org


> Written with [StackEdit](https://stackedit.io/).
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbODE3NjA4ODU2XX0=
-->