
# Definition of a Patient

## ALL

  

**I. Purpose**

A. This protocol is a patient driven document and therefore the need to adequately define who is or is not a patient should be made.

1. This protocol definition is not intended to supersede an agency’s SOP/SOGs in regards to how the agency’s staff shall perform on encounters with persons who may or may not be considered patients, but rather offer guidance for these encounters.

**II. Protocol**

A. Patient - any person who identifies him/herself as requiring medical assistance or evaluation, or any person who has a physical or medical complaint or condition from an illness or injury.

B. Not a Patient - An adult may be considered _not_ a patient if **all** of the following criteria are met:

1. A reasonably competent provider would deem the person in question as having a sufficient capacity to determine that they have something about which to complain.

2. Acute illness, injury, or intoxication is not suspected based on appearance.

3. The person in question denies illness or injury and presents with no signs or symptoms of illness or injury.

4. There is minimal or absent mechanism of injury.

5. The person in question clearly indicates a desire not to be a patient.

6. The person in question does not have another party acting as their medical power of attorney.

7. The person did not call 911/ask for help.

C. If all of the criteria in Section B are met, the adult may be considered not a patient and a PCR or Refusal of Care are not required. The responding agency should however create documentation as to the encounter per the agency’s SOP/SOGs.

D. For the purpose of the definition of a patient and the ability to deny a capacity assessment, any person who has not attained the age of 18 or who is not a legally emancipated minor shall be considered a minor and therefore unable to make a competent medical decision for their self. Refer to SB211 Section I B for direction as to who can make a decision for a minor.

**Notes:**

A. This protocol is intended to refer to individual patient contacts. In the event of a multiple party incident, such as a multi-vehicle crash, it is expected that a reasonable effort will be made to identify those parties with acute illness or injuries. Adult patients indicating that they do not wish assistance for themselves or dependent minors in such a multiple party incident should be managed per agency’s SOP/SOGs.

B. No protocol can anticipate every scenario and providers must use best judgement. When in doubt as to whether an individual is a “patient”, err on the side of caution and perform a full assessment and documentation.

## Notes

For the purpose of the definition of a patient and the ability to deny a capacity assessment, any person who has not attained the age of 18 or who is not a legally emancipated minor shall be considered a minor and therefore unable to make a competent medical decision for their self. A responsible adult is able to make a competent medical decision as to whether the minor is a patient or not a patient so long as the minor satisfies the above criteria. Refer to SB211 Section I B for direction as to who can make a decision for a minor.

This Protocol is intended to refer to individual patient contacts. In the event of a multiple party incident, such as a multi-vehicle crash, it is expected that a reasonable effort will be made to identify those parties with acute illness or injuries. Adult patients indicating that they do not wish assistance for themselves or dependent minors in such multiple party incidents should be managed and documented per agency’s SOP/SOGs. No protocol can anticipate every scenario and providers must use best judgement. When in doubt as to whether an individual is a “patient”, err on the side of caution and perform a full assessment and documentation/PCR.

### The full version of this protocol also includes a graphic flowchart.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE0OTk0NzE5NzddfQ==
-->