# KY - Use of Lights and Sirens

## KY-ALL
  

**I. This protocol is specific to Kentucky agencies only.**

II. Purpose

A. The estimated EMS fatality rate (12.7 per 100,000 workers) is more than twice the national rate. Vehicle crashes of all types remain the leading cause of death in EMS. The use of Lights and Sirens in the transport of a patient from the scene of the hospital by EMS personnel should be consistent with “best practices”, be medically defensible and conform to Kentucky state law. It is not without risk and should be used only when there is a likely benefit to the patient. This is to ensure the safety of our patients, our staff, our citizens and ourselves.

III. Policy

A. KRS 189.910 to KRS 189.950 outline the legal parameters under which an emergency vehicle may be exempt from certain traffic regulations. The vehicle operator should be familiar withese these statutes. Specifically:

1. 189.940 Exemptions from traffic regulations

a. The speed limitations set forth in the Kentucky Revised Statutes do not apply to emergency vehicles:

i. When responding to emergency calls; or

ii. To police vehicles when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law; or

iii. To ambulances when transporting a patient to medical care facilities; and

iv. The driver thereof is giving the warning required by subsection 5 (a) and (b) of this section.

b. No portion of this subsection shall be construed to relieve the driver of the duty to operate the vehicle with due regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway.

B. The law permits such emergency vehicles only on emergency calls or when transporting to a medical care facility to utilize lights and sirens. EMS personnel are instructed to follow the state laws and use lights and sirens while going to the hospital only when it is medically necessary for the patient to be rapidly transported. Rapid transport to the scene may be necessary in certain instances to evaluate the situation for possible life threats. It is then that the EMS personnel in charge of patient care will make the appropriate transportation decision. Although time is typically saved, studies have shown the savings to be from less than one minute to less than four minutes and rarely clinically significant to the patient. Transport in this manner is not without risk to the patient. The EMS personnel in charge will have to weight the risks and benefits to the patient, and document this rationale on the EMS run form. This policy does not restrict the EMS personnel from changing a non-emergency transport back into an emergency transport if conditions change.



<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTI0OTAzMzk2N119
-->