# KY - Bloodborne / Airborne Pathogens

## KY-ALL

  

I. BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS

A. Emergency Medical Services personnel should assume that all bodily fluids and tissues are potentially infectious with bloodborne pathogens including HIV (causing AIDS) and HBV (causing hepatitis), and must protect themselves accordingly by use of body substance isolation (BSI).

B. Body substance isolation procedures include the appropriate use of hand washing, protective barriers (such as gloves, masks, goggles, etc.), and care in the use and disposal of needles and other sharp instruments. EMTs are also encouraged to obtain the hepatitis B vaccine series to decrease the likelihood of hepatitis B transmission. EMTs who have exudative lesions, weeping dermatitis, or open wounds should refrain from all direct patient care and from handling patient-care equipment as they are at increased risk of transmission and reception of bloodborne pathogens through these lesions. Transmission of bloodborne pathogens has been shown to occur when the blood of the infected patient is able to come in direct contact with the blood of the health-care worker.

C. EMTs who have had a direct bloodborne pathogen exposure should immediately wash the exposed area with soap and water and a suitable disinfectant. The exposed area should then be covered with a sterile dressing. Upon arrival at the destination hospital, after responsibility for the patient has been transferred to the emergency department, the EMT should thoroughly cleanse the exposed site, complete a state of Kentucky Emergency Response/Public Safety Worker Incident Report Form, and sign in to the Emergency Department as a workers-compensation patient. The only exception to this latter step is when the squad has a designated exposure officer and medical advisor wherein the exposed EMT has definitive and immediate medical care elsewhere.

II. AIRBORNE PATHOGENS

A. EMTs who believe they have been exposed to an airborne pathogen may proceed as above in getting timely medical care. It is expected that a properly filled out Patient Care Report will allow hospital infection control staff to contact EMTs involved in patient care where that patient was subsequently found to have a potential airborne pathogen such as Tuberculosis, Neisseria meningitis, SARS, etc.

B. Airborne Personal Protective Equipment (APPE)

1. Recommended APPE consists of a N95 respirator, prior fit testing is recommended.

2. Apply PPE if the patient presents with the following signs or symptoms

a. Cough

b. Rash

c. Fever

C. Limit the number of personnel in contact with suspected patients to reduce the potential of exposure to other providers and bystanders.

D. Patients suspected of being infected with a possible airborne pathogen should be masked if tolerated.

E. Patients requiring oxygen therapy should receive oxygen through a mask with a surgical mask placed over the oxygen mask to block pathogen release.

F. APPE should be in place when performing suctioning, airway management and ventilation assistance (Bag-Valve-Mask) for suspect patients.

G. Limit procedures that may result in the spread of the suspected pathogen, e.g. nebulizer treatments.

H. Exchange of fresh air into the patient compartment is recommended during transport of patient with a suspected airborne pathogen.

I. Early notification to the receiving hospital should be made such that the receiving hospital may enact its respective airborne pathogen procedures.

III. DECONTAMINATION

A. In addition to accepted decontamination steps of cleaning surfaces and equipment with an approved solution and proper disposal of contaminated disposable equipment, the use of fresh air ventilation should be incorporated (open all doors and windows to allow fresh air after arrival at the hospital).

B. All personnel in contact with the patient should wash their hands thoroughly with warm water and an approved hand-cleaning solution.

C. Ambulances equipped with airborne pathogen filtration systems should be cleaned and maintained in accordance with manufacturer guidelines
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTM2NDA4OTk3Nl19
-->