---


---

<h1 id="ventricular-fibrillationtachycardia-adult-wo-pulse">Ventricular Fibrillation/Tachycardia Adult w/o Pulse</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is 16 years and older.</p>
<p>B. Patient is unresponsive.</p>
<p>C. Patient is without a pulse (pulse should be checked for a maximum of 10 seconds, when in doubt start CPR).</p>
<p><strong>II. AED Findings</strong></p>
<p>A. Shock Advised</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>III. EKG Findings</strong></p>
<p>A. Ventricular fibrillation, or</p>
<p>B. Ventricular tachycardia without a pulse</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>IV. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Continue CPR and care per SB204.</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>B. If rhythm is ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia, DEFIBRILLATE IMMEDIATELY AT MAXIMUM ENERGY PER DEFIBRILLATOR MANUFACTURER’S RECOMMENDATION and immediately resume CPR.</p>
<p>C. Perform CPR for 2 minutes before another pulse or rhythm check is done.</p>
<p>D. Administer Epinephrine 1 mg (10 ml of 0.1 mg/mL) IV/IO push. Repeat every 3 to 5 minutes as long as arrest continues.</p>
<p>E. Administer Amiodarone 300 mg IV/IO push. Repeat Amiodarone 150 mg IV/IO push in 3 - 5 minutes if still in VF/VTach</p>
<ol>
<li>Lidocaine may be substituted as: Lidocaine 1.5 mg/kg IV/IO push. Repeat Lidocaine 0.5 to 0.75 mg/kg IV/IO in 3-5 minutes if still in VF/VTach</li>
</ol>
<p>F. Recheck rhythm after each 2-minute cycle of CPR is complete and defibrillate if indicated.</p>
<p>G. Consider pad placement change after three unsuccessful defibrillation attempts.</p>
<p>H. If ventricular fibrillation or pulseless ventricular tachycardia persists, transport to an Emergency Department could be considered.</p>
<p>I. Consider probable causes per SB204.</p>
<p>J. If return of spontaneous circulation is achieved, continue care per Protocol C307 (Post-Return of Spontaneous Circulation Care).</p>
<p>K. If rhythm changes to another rhythm, go to the appropriate protocol.</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. High Quality CPR (SB204) is considered the mainstay of therapy for Cardiac Arrest victims.</p>
<p>B. If a pulseless patient is found to have agonal or gasping-type respirations that have no pattern and occur very infrequently, the AED or quick-look paddles should be applied immediately.</p>
<h2 id="medic-2">Medic</h2>
<p>A. Consider H’s and T’s (see SB204)</p>
<p>B. Endotracheal (ET) administration of drugs is acceptable but not preferable. Amiodarone cannot be given ET. ET administration is double the normal dose with 10 ml NS flush afterwards.</p>
<p>C. Medications given through a peripheral vein or IO should be followed by a 10 mL bolus of fluid.</p>
<p>D. Waveform End Tidal CO2, if available, should be routinely used in cardiac arrests.</p>
<p>E. An abrupt sustained increase in ETCO2 may indicate ROSC.</p>
<p>F. ETCO2 (&lt;10) should prompt re-evaluation of endotracheal tube’s correct placement, quality of compressions, or consideration that future treatment is futile.</p>
<p>G. “See-through CPR” monitor technology is still developing. It is recommended to continue compressions until scheduled pulse checks per ACLS.</p>

