---


---

<h1 id="asystole---pulseless-electrical-activity-pea">Asystole - Pulseless Electrical Activity (PEA)</h1>
<h1 id="all">ALL</h1>
<p>I. INCLUSION CRITERIA</p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is 16 years and older.</p>
<p>B. Patient is unresponsive.</p>
<p>C. Patient has no pulse (pulse should be checked for a maximum of 10 seconds, when in doubt start CPR).</p>
<p>D. AED FINDINGS</p>
<p>• No shock advised.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>E. EKG FINDINGS</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Organized cardiac rhythm with QRS complexes indicating PEA, or</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Asystole on the cardiac monitor in two or more leads.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>II. Protocol</p>
<p>A. Continue CPR and care per SB204.</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>B. Administer Epinephrine 1 mg (10 ml of 0.1 mg/mL) IV/IO push.</p>
<ol>
<li>Repeat every 3 to 5 minutes as long as cardiac arrest continues.</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Search for possible causes of Asystole/PEA as listed in SB204.</p>
<p>D. Consider the following:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>In the setting of renal failure/ESRD, consider management of hyperkalemia early in resuscitation. See protocol M418.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For preexisting metabolic acidosis or tricyclic antidepressant overdose, administer sodium bicarbonate 1 mEq/kg IV/IO push.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For hypovolemic arrest, administer 1-liter normal saline bolus. Chilled saline may be used if available.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For suspected pneumothorax, perform needle thoracostomy.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>E. After 30 minutes, consider termination of resuscitative efforts as detailed in the Determination of Death / Termination of ACLS protocol (A105).</p>
<p>F. If transporting, notify receiving hospital.</p>
<p>G. If return of spontaneous circulation is achieved, continue care per Protocol Post-Return of Spontaneous Circulation Care C307.</p>
<p>H. If rhythm changes to another rhythm, go to the appropriate protocol.</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>NOTES:</strong></p>
<p>A. High Quality CPR (SB204) is considered the mainstay of therapy for Cardiac Arrest victims.</p>
<p>B. A main cause of PEA is hypoxia, and the effectiveness of ventilation should be evaluated constantly.</p>
<h2 id="medic-2">Medic</h2>
<p>C. Consider H’s and T’s (see SB204)</p>
<p>D. Endotracheal (ET) administration of drugs is acceptable but not preferable. ET administration is double the normal dose with 10 ml NS flush afterwards.</p>
<p>E. Medications given through a peripheral vein or IO should be followed by a 10 mL bolus of fluid.</p>
<p>F. Waveform End Tidal CO2 if available should be routinely used in Cardiac Arrests.</p>
<p>G. An abrupt sustained increase in ETCO2 may indicate ROSC.</p>
<p>H. ETCO2 (&lt;10) should prompt re-evaluation of endotracheal tube’s correct placement, quality of compressions or consideration that future treatment is futile.</p>
<p>I. “See-through CPR” monitor technology is still developing. It is recommended to continue compressions until scheduled pulse checks per ACLS.</p>

