---


---

<h1 id="bradycardia">Bradycardia</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is 16 years and older.</p>
<p>B. Chest pain, shortness of breath or inability to give history due to alteration in level of consciousness, which is thought to be related to the slow heart rate.</p>
<p>C. Palpable pulse &lt; 60</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Heart rate typically &lt; 50 for bradyarrhythmia.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Electrical Heart Rate and palpable pulse rate may differ in some arrhythmias, consider palpable pulse rate for effectiveness of circulation</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Systolic blood pressure less than 80 mmHg, cardiogenic shock, or pulmonary edema.</p>
<p>E. Signs of inadequate perfusion such as acute heart failure, delayed capillary refill, diaphoresis, or altered mental status.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>II. EKG Findings</strong></p>
<p>A. Ventricular rate less than 60.</p>
<p>B. Evaluate for Heart Block.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Maintain airway and administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
<p>B. Check vital signs frequently.</p>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<p>C. If available, request ALS back-up for:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Systolic Blood Pressure &lt;100mmHg.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient complains of chest pain, trouble breathing, or dizziness.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient has altered mental status.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient has suffered syncope.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient has a pacemaker or defibrillator in place.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>D. Apply quick look paddles if not already monitored.</p>
<p>E. Place on cardiac monitor, obtain diagnostic EKG.</p>
<p>F. Initiate IV/IO access.</p>
<p>G. Administer atropine 1 mg IV/IO push.</p>
<ol>
<li>If no response to initial measures, repeat atropine 1 mg IV/IO push every 3-5 minutes up to a total of 3 mg.</li>
</ol>
<p>H. Repeat diagnostic EKG after any clinically significant rhythm change.</p>
<p>I. Consider external pacing if patient is unstable on initial assessment or if remains symptomatic (Hypotension, altered mental status, syncope, shock, etc) after attempting atropine.</p>
<ol>
<li>Contraindications</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Patient’s age is younger than 16 years.</p>
<p>b. Cardiac arrest.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Procedure</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Connect pacing electrodes and cables.</p>
<p>b. Do not place over existing implanted pacemaker or defibrillator</p>
<p>c. Cardiac monitor/pacer/defib devices require the limb leads to be placed for demand mode pacing.</p>
<p>d. Asynchronous (non-demand) pacing mode is generally not desired, pacer should normally be in demand-mode.</p>
<p>e. Begin pacing at a rate of 60-80 with current output at 20 mA. Increase current output every 10 seconds until either cardiac (electrical and mechanical) capture occurs or maximal output is reached.</p>
<p>f. Do not discontinue pacer if the patient complains of significant pain from the pacemaker when treatment is necessary for stability.</p>
<p>g. Do NOT delay initial treatment of unstable patients for IV/IO access or drug administration.</p>
<p>h. For sedation, consider administration of midazolam 2-5mg IV/IM/IN/IO if blood pressure allows.</p>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Medication</th>
<th>Route</th>
<th>Dose</th>
<th>Frequency</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>midazolam</td>
<td>IN</td>
<td>2-5mg</td>
<td>5-15 mins</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>midazolam</td>
<td>IM</td>
<td>2-5mg</td>
<td>10-15 mins</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>midazolam</td>
<td>IV/IO</td>
<td>2-5mg</td>
<td>5 mins</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table><p>i. If capture occurs, reassess peripheral pulses and vital signs.</p>
<p>j. If bradycardia and hypotension continue consider push dose epi per SB205 Hypotension/Shock.</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. Consider bradycardia to be a <em>symptom</em> of an underlying problem and not a diagnosis.</p>
<p>B. If a transcutaneous pacemaker is available, its use may be preferable to the administration of atropine for the patient with chest pain and a Mobitz II second-degree heart block or third-degree heart block with wide QRS complexes.</p>
<p>C. Do not delay initiation of transcutaneous pacing while awaiting IV access or for atropine to take effect in the patient with serious signs or symptoms.</p>
<p>D. Transport patients with transcutaneous pacing to a hospital with cath lab capabilities (see Hospital Capabilities Survey).</p>
<p>E. Consider 3rd degree Heart Block as an MI until proven otherwise. Administer Aspirin 324mg by mouth (unless contraindicated) and transport patient to a hospital with cath lab capabilities (see Hospital Capabilities Survey).</p>
<p>F. It is important to treat the patient and not the number. Remember that athletes may have heart rates of 40-60.</p>
<h2 id="medic-2">Medic</h2>
<p>G. Remove any nitroglycerin or other transdermal patches or pads before pacing or defibrillating.</p>
<p>H. Consider sedating fully conscious patients prior to pacing.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Consider other treatment options for fully conscious patients prior to sedation solely for pacing treatment.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Initially unconscious patients may require sedation after treatment due to improving mental status.</p>
</li>
</ol>

