---


---

<h1 id="wide-complex-tachycardia-with-pulse-unstable">Wide Complex Tachycardia with Pulse (Unstable)</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is 16 years and older.</p>
<p>B. Patient complains of chest pain, or shortness of breath, dizziness, or syncope.</p>
<p>C. Palpable pulse with a rate greater than 150.</p>
<p>D. Systolic blood pressure less than 90 mm Hg, or</p>
<p>E. Signs of inadequate perfusion such as acute heart failure, delayed capillary refill, diaphoresis, or altered mental status.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>II. EKG Findings</strong></p>
<p>A. Ventricular Rate above 150.</p>
<p>B. Wide QRS (greater than 0.12 sec or 3 little blocks).</p>
<p>C. Absent P waves.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Maintain airway and administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<p>B. If available, request ALS back-up.</p>
<p>C. If no ALS available, initiate rapid transport to closest appropriate facility and provide pre-notification.</p>
<p>D. Apply AED.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>If patient is conscious and has a palpable pulse, do not shock.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If patient becomes unconscious or loses a palpable pulse, press “Analyze” and follow AED instructions. Provide care per Protocol C300 (Ventricular Tachycardia/Ventricular Fibrillation).</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>E. If rhythm is Torsades de Pointes, then give magnesium sulfate 2 g IV/IO diluted in at least 10mL normal saline over 10-15 minutes.</p>
<p>F. If the patient is to be cardioverted and does not have an altered level of consciousness, consider administer of Midazolam (Versed) until patient’s speech slurs.</p>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Medication</th>
<th>Route</th>
<th>Dose</th>
<th>Frequency</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>midazolam</td>
<td>IN</td>
<td>2-5mg</td>
<td>5-15 mins</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>midazolam</td>
<td>IM</td>
<td>2-5mg</td>
<td>10-15 mins</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>midazolam</td>
<td>IV/IO</td>
<td>2-5mg</td>
<td>5 mins</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table><p>G. If VT persists, cardiovert at 100 joules (or biphasic equivalent). Cardioversion should be synchronized unless it is impossible to synchronize a shock (i.e., the patient’s rhythm is irregular).</p>
<p>H. If VT persists, repeat cardioversion at 200 joules (or biphasic equivalent).</p>
<p>I. If VT persists, repeat cardioversion at 300 joules (or biphasic equivalent).</p>
<p>J. If VT persists, repeat cardioversion at 360 joules (or biphasic equivalent).</p>
<p>K. If ventricular tachycardia recurs, repeat synchronized cardioversion at previously successful energy level. If cardioversion is not successful, repeat at next higher energy level and continue with the protocol.</p>
<p>L. Obtain a diagnostic EKG after successful cardioversion.</p>

