---


---

<h1 id="wide-complex-tachycardia-with-pulse-stable">Wide Complex Tachycardia with Pulse (Stable)</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is 16 years and older.</p>
<p>B. No associated symptoms such as chest pain, shortness of breath, depressed or altered level of consciousness.</p>
<p>C. Patient is conscious.</p>
<p>D. Pulse rate is greater than 150.</p>
<p>E. Systolic blood pressure greater than 90 mmHg.</p>
<p>F. Patient is without signs of inadequate perfusion (heart failure, delayed capillary refill, and diaphoresis).</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>II. EKG Findings</strong></p>
<p>A. Rate above 150.</p>
<p>B. Wide QRS (greater than 0.12 sec or 3 little blocks).</p>
<p>C. Absent P waves.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Maintain airway and administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
<p>B. Obtain vital signs frequently.</p>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<p>C. If available, request ALS back-up.</p>
<p>D. If no ALS available, initiate rapid transport to closest appropriate facility and provide pre-arrival notification.</p>
<p>E. Do not apply AED to a conscious patient or a patient with a palpable pulse.</p>
<ol>
<li>If patient becomes unconscious or loses a palpable pulse, apply AED, press “Analyze” and follow AED instructions. Provide care per Protocol C300 (Ventricular Tachycardia/Ventricular Fibrillation).</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>F. Maintain cardiac monitoring at all times.</p>
<p>G. Obtain diagnostic EKG of initial rhythm.</p>
<p>H. Initiate IV/IO access.</p>
<p>I. If rhythm is Torsades de Pointes then give magnesium sulfate 2 g IV/IO diluted in at least 10mL normal saline over 10-15 minutes.</p>
<p>J. If the wide complex tachycardia persists, administer Amiodarone 150 mg IV/IO over 10 minutes.</p>
<p>K. If the wide complex tachycardia persists, Amiodarone may be repeated after 3-5 minutes at 150 mg over 10 minutes.</p>
<p>L. Only in cases of drug shortages, lidocaine may be substituted for amiodarone as follows:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Lidocaine 2% 0.5-1mg/kg</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>May repeat dose every 5-10 minutes with maximum total dose of 3mg/kg.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>M. Obtain a diagnostic EKG after any rhythm change.</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p>N. If the patient becomes unstable, then proceed to the Wide Complex Tachycardia with Pulse (Unstable) Protocol (C303).</p>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. The trial of adenosine was removed in 2023.</p>
<p>B. Lidocaine is not as effective as amiodarone in sustained wide complex tachycardia.2</p>
<p>2 Armengol, RE, et al. (1989). Lack of effectiveness of lidocaine for sustained wide QRS complex tachycardia. AnnEmergMed 18 (3): 254-257.</p>

