---


---

<h1 id="narrow-complex-tachycardia-wpulse-stable">Narrow Complex Tachycardia w/Pulse (Stable)</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. INCLUSION CRITERIA</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is 16 years and older.</p>
<p>B. No history of trauma or fever.</p>
<p>C. Patient is alert.</p>
<p>D. Pulse rate is greater than 150.</p>
<p>E. Systolic blood pressure is above 90 mm Hg.</p>
<p>F. Patient is without signs of inadequate perfusion (for example: acute heart failure, delayed capillary refill, diaphoresis or altered mental status).</p>
<ol>
<li>For patients with signs of inadequate perfusion go to C306 Narrow Complex Tachycardia w/Pulse (Unstable).</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>II. EKG FINDINGS</strong></p>
<p>A. Rapid (greater than 150), regular atrial rate.</p>
<ol>
<li>If irregular consult medical control prior to any antiarrhythmic treatment</li>
</ol>
<p>B. QRS duration of less than 0.12 seconds.</p>
<p>C. P waves are usually absent.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>III. PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p>A. Assure airway patency and administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
<p>B. Place patient on cardiac monitor.</p>
<p>C. Have patient perform Valsalva and evaluate for any changes.</p>
<ol>
<li>AHA guidelines suggest augmenting the Valsalva maneuver with passive leg raise is more effective.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<p>D. If available, request ALS back-up or arrange to intercept an ALS unit as appropriate.</p>
<p>E. If no ALS available, initiate rapid transport to closest appropriate facility and provide pre-notification.</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>F. Establish vascular access. Proximal IV access is preferred.</p>
<p>G. Perform a diagnostic EKG. Repeat a diagnostic EKG after any rhythm change.</p>
<p>H. Administer adenosine. If tachycardia persists and is still thought to be narrow complex tachycardia, continue to administer adenosine to a maximum of three doses.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p><strong>If under 90kg (200lbs)</strong>, administer adenosine 6mg rapid IV push followed by 10-20 ml of normal saline. One additional dose at 12mg may be attempted if the first dose is unsuccessful.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p><strong>If over 90kg (200lbs)</strong>, administer adenosine 12 mg rapid IV push followed by 10-20 ml of normal saline. This may be repeated one time if the first dose is unsuccessful.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>I. Notify the receiving hospital.</p>
<p>J. Monitor patient frequently. If patient deteriorates, move to C306 Narrow Complex Tachycardia w/Pulse (Unstable)</p>
<p><strong>NOTES:</strong></p>
<p>A. Adenosine has a short half-life of about ten seconds. For the drug to be effective, it must be able to reach the heart prior to being metabolized in the bloodstream. To achieve a high concentration of drug at the heart, a large IV, preferably in the antecubital fossa, should be established. Then when the adenosine is given, it should be followed by a bolus of saline that will swiftly empty the intravenous catheter of the drug and push it on its way to the cardiac circulation.</p>
<p>B. If there is a significant AV nodal block after a dose of adenosine and if an underlying atrial rhythm of atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter is observed, then an additional dose of adenosine is NOT indicated.</p>
<p>C. If the initial rhythm is tachycardic and irregular, then an atrial fibrillation rhythm is likely. Do not treat with adenosine.</p>
<p>D. Adenosine side effects include flushing, chest pain, and dizziness, impending doom. These last only a short time because of adenosine’s short half-life.</p>

