---


---

<h1 id="airway-obstruction-or-stridor">Airway Obstruction or Stridor</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is 16 years or older.</p>
<p>B. The patient is unable to speak because of an airway obstruction or has a history suggestive of foreign body aspiration, i.e., sudden shortness of breath while eating.</p>
<p>C. The patient exhibits stridor lung sounds.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>D. EKG Findings indicate normal sinus rhythm, sinus tachycardia or atrial fibrillation with controlled ventricular response. If other rhythm is present, then refer to the appropriate arrhythmia protocol.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>II. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. If the patient is alert but obviously choking from a presumed foreign body:</p>
<p>  1. Have the patient cough forcefully, if possible.</p>
<p>  2. Provide supplemental oxygen.</p>
<p>  3. Perform the Heimlich maneuver until successful.</p>
<p>    i. If Heimlich successful, encourage transport for evaluation.</p>
<p>B. If the patient is found unconscious or becomes unconscious:</p>
<p>  1. Begin CPR and attempt to bag valve mask ventilate while preparations are made to intubate. Visually inspect upper airway prior to delivering all breaths during CPR in case foreign body has been successfully dislodged from airway.</p>
<p>  2. Consider early transport.</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>  3. Using the laryngoscope, visualize the posterior pharynx and vocal cords for evidence of a foreign body. Utilize video laryngoscopy, if available.</p>
<p> 4. Remove any foreign bodies very carefully with suction device or Magill forceps. If available, use large bore suction tubing and tip.</p>
<p> 5. If no foreign body is seen or patient does not begin breathing spontaneously, intubate the trachea. If you suspect a foreign body is below the vocal cords but above the carina, it may be necessary to push the foreign body down the right mainstem bronchus with the ET tube in order to aerate at least the left lung.</p>
<p> 6. If unable to pass an orotracheal tube due to obstruction, perform a surgical airway as described in the Airway Protocol (T705).</p>
<p> 7. If wheezing and no stridor, consider an albuterol nebulizer treatment.</p>

