---


---

<h1 id="asthma---copd">Asthma - COPD</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is 16 years or older.</p>
<p>B. The patient has a history of asthma, emphysema or COPD AND complains of a worsening shortness of breath.</p>
<p>C. Lung exam has wheezing, rales/rhonchi, or poor air exchange.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>D. EKG Findings indicate normal sinus rhythm, sinus tachycardia or atrial fibrillation with controlled ventricular response. If other rhythm is present, then proceed to the appropriate arrhythmia protocol.</p>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<p><strong>A. Protocol</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>If available, request ALS back-up for:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Pediatric patient, who is wheezing, grunting, has retractions, stridor, or any other signs of respiratory distress.</p>
<p>b. Patient who doesn’t have a prescribed inhaler and the transport time is greater than 30 minutes.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>
<p>Check to see if the patient has already taken any inhaler or nebulizer doses prior to arrival. Note time and amount.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Do not use the inhaler if any of the following are present:</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Inability of patient to use device.</p>
<p>b. Inhaler is not prescribed for the patient.</p>
<p>c. Medication is expired.</p>
<p>d. If the patient has met the maximum prescribed dose of their inhaler according to prescription label, contact medical control.</p>
<ol start="4">
<li>Administer Albuterol (Proventil) aerosol 2.5mg/2.5ml via nebulizer. Consider adding 1 vial Ipratropium Bromide (0.5mg of 0.017%) to the Albuterol aerosol. May substitute Duoneb (Albuterol plus Ipratropium Bromide that is premixed) for all Albuterol treatments.</li>
</ol>
<p>a. <strong>OR</strong> Assist the patient with using their own metered-dose inhaler if nebulizer is not available.</p>
<ol start="5">
<li>To assist with administration of a metered-dose inhaler:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Make sure inhaler is at room temperature and shake several times to mix the medication.</p>
<p>b. Take oxygen mask off the patient.</p>
<p>c. Tell the patient to exhale deeply and put the mouthpiece in front of the mouth. If the patient has a spacer device, it should be used.</p>
<p>d. Have patient depress the metered-dose inhaler as they begin to inhale deeply.</p>
<p>e. Instruct the patient to hold their breath for as long as comfortable, so the medication can be absorbed.</p>
<p>f. Put oxygen mask back on the patient.</p>
<p>g. Repeat a dose after one minute. If further medication is necessary beyond the patient’s prescribed number of doses, contact medical control.</p>
<ol start="6">
<li>Recheck vital signs (including pulse oximetry if available) and perform focused assessment.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<ol start="7">
<li>
<p>If the patient is in impending respiratory failure, obtain IV access.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If multiple Albuterol treatments are anticipated, administer Prednisone 60 mg PO or Solu-Medrol (Methylprednisolone) 60 mg IV or PO.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If signs of impending respiratory failure (see notes):</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>A. Consider initiating non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (BIPAP or CPAP). Start at 5 cmH2O and titrate higher as tolerated by patient.</p>
<p>B. <strong>ASTHMA ONLY</strong>: Consider administering epinephrine 0.3 mg IM (1mg/ml) followed by magnesium sulfate 2 g IV/IO diluted in 100 ml normal saline over 20 minutes.</p>
<ol start="10">
<li>Consider repetitive Albuterol treatments if needed, up to a total of three treatments.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>B. Consider PAP, reference protocol T709.</p>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. When attempting to differentiate between COPD and congestive heart failure, the medication history will usually give more valuable information than will the physical exam.</p>
<p>B. Ipratropium Bromide is an anticholinergic medication and may cause tachycardia. Do not use on patients with narrow angle glaucoma or patients with bladder neck obstruction (history of urinary retention).</p>
<p>C. There is growing evidence that steroids (Prednisone or Solu-Medrol (Methylprednisolone) for adults may be beneficial.</p>
<p>D. Solu-Medrol (Methyprednisolone) can be given orally to adult patients, though the IV route is preferred.</p>
<p>E. Signs of impending respiratory failure</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Depressed mental status or excessive sleepiness</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Agitation, panic, or sensation of drowning</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Inability to maintain respiratory effort.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Cyanosis or worsening hypoxia</p>
</li>
</ol>

