---


---

<h1 id="congestive-heart-failure">Congestive Heart Failure</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p>I. <strong>Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is 16 years or older.</p>
<p>B. History of heart disease.</p>
<p>C. Respiratory rate greater than 20.</p>
<p>D. Systolic pressure greater than 100mm Hg.</p>
<p>E. Rales on lung exam.</p>
<p>F. Evidence of respiratory insufficiency such as air hunger, accessory muscle use or altered mental status.</p>
<p>G. MAY have jugular venous distention or peripheral edema.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>H. EKG Findings indicate normal sinus rhythm, sinus tachycardia or atrial fibrillation with controlled ventricular response. If other rhythm is present, then proceed to the appropriate arrhythmia protocol.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>II. Exclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Clinical impression consistent with an infection (e.g., fever)</p>
<p>B. Clinical impression consistent with asthma/COPD – See protocol M403.</p>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Consider advanced airway management if required.</p>
<p>B. Consider PAP, reference protocol T709.</p>
<p>C. Nitroglycerin Contraindications:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Systolic BP &lt; 100mmHg</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient has taken sildenafil (Viagra) or avanafil (Stendra) in the last 24 hours.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient has taken vardenafil (Levitra, Staxyn) in the last 48 hours.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient has taken tadalafil (Cialis) in the last 72 hours.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient is on medication for Pulmonary Hypertension. (ex: sildenafil (Revatio), macitentan/tadalafil (Opsynvi), tadalafil (Adcirca), vardenafil (Levitra, Staxyn), riociguat (Adempas), vericiguat (Verquvo)).</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>D. Establish IV access.</p>
<p>E. Obtain diagnostic EKG.</p>
<p>F. Consider nitroglycerin.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>For patients with mild symptoms (eg. HR &lt; 100, SBP 100-150, RR &lt;25, no accessory muscle use, retractions, fatigue or O2 sats &gt;94%) administer LOW DOSE nitroglycerin 0.4 mg sublingual every 3-5 minutes to a max of 3 doses.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For patients with moderate to severe symptoms (eg. HR &gt;100, SBP &gt;150mmHg, RR &gt;25, accessory muscle use, retractions, fatigue, O2 sats &lt;94%) consider HIGH DOSE nitroglycerin 0.8 mg SL (2 tablets or 2 sprays of 0.4mg nitroglycerin) q 3-5 minutes for max 3 doses. Don’t remove CPAP to provide additional doses of nitroglycerine.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Topical nitroglycerin (nitropaste) may be used in lieu of sublingual nitroglycerin. Apply the nitropaste to the anterior chest wall one time. Dosing is 1" for SBP 100-150, 1.5" for 150-200, and 2" for SBP&gt;200.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Blood pressure must be reassessed after each dose of nitroglycerin is given. Repeat doses should not be given if SBP is less than 100mmHg. The goal is for a 20% reduction in patient’s blood pressure.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>In addition to blood pressure, carefully monitor level of consciousness and respiratory status. Do not administer NTG tablets if decreased respiratory rate, level of consciousness or other concerns for aspiration exist based on patient’s clinical status.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. When attempting to differentiate between COPD and congestive heart failure, the medication history will usually give more valuable information than will the physical exam.</p>
<p>B. Transport to the hospital should be initiated immediately if the patient’s airway is compromised. Otherwise, transport should be initiated as soon as possible taking into account the time required for pharmacologic therapy.</p>

