---


---

<h1 id="nausea-and-vomiting">Nausea and Vomiting</h1>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is 12 months or older.</p>
<p>B. Patient has nausea or vomiting.</p>
<p><strong>II. Exclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Known allergies to 5-HT(3) receptor antagonists such as Kytril (granisetron) and Aloxi (palonosetron).</p>
<p>B. Known allergy to promethazine (Phenergan).</p>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Administer ondansetron (Zofran):</p>
<ol>
<li>Dosing:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Adult: 4 - 8mg IV/IO/IM or PO (orally disintegrating tablet) if IV access not available; May repeat 4 mg dose IV/IO in 5 minutes if symptoms persist (do not repeat IM/PO doses).</p>
<p>b. Pediatric: 0.15 mg/kg (max 4 mg) IV/IO/IM or 4 mg PO for patients 15 kg and above; do not repeat.</p>
<p>i. IV weight-based solution may be given PO as an ODT alternative.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Pharmacokinetics</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Onset of IM is approximately 30 minutes with half-life similar to IV dose.</p>
<p>b. Onset of PO dose is more rapid than IM.</p>
<ol start="3">
<li>Administration: IV/IO slow IV push (over at least 30 seconds, preferably over 2-5 minutes).</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Administer Promethazine (Phenergan) as an alternative to ondansetron (Zofran)</p>
<ol>
<li>Dosing:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Adult: 12.5mg – 25mg Deep IM.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Pediatric: not for use in pediatrics</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. The frequency of side effects is extremely low, but may include:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Headache and/or dizziness, fever, urinary retention, rash, agitation, mild sedation and extra pyramidal (dystonic) reaction; may cause bronchospasm and arrhythmias, but incidence is uncommon.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Ondansetron does not prevent motion sickness.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>B. The side effect profile of ondansetron is extremely low favoring the use of this medication.</p>
<p>C. Ondansetron can increase the QT interval and should be used with caution in patients who are on other medications that can increase the QT interval, or have a prolonged QTc.</p>
<p>D. In an adrenal insufficiency patient, nausea and vomiting can be signs of adrenal crisis. See M417.</p>
<p>E. Promethazine may increase, prolong, or intensify the sedative action of CNS depressants, such as alcohol, sedative/hypnotics (including barbiturates), general anesthetics, narcotics, and narcotic analgesics.</p>

