---


---

<h1 id="hyperhypoglycemia">Hyper/Hypoglycemia</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is 16 years or older.</p>
<p>B. Patients identified or suspected of diabetic problems - hyper/hypoglycemia.</p>
<p><strong>II.</strong> <strong>Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Assess Blood Glucose</p>
<ol>
<li>If unable to assess blood glucose use history and other assessment means to proceed with treatment. Treatment can be life saving for a hypoglycemic patient but will not necessarily cause a hyperglycemic patient excessive harm.</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Hypoglycemia</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Glucose Level is less than 60 mg/dL or glucometer reads “LOW.”</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For hypoglycemia defined above, treat in one of the following manners until an improvement in mental status:</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. If patient is able to swallow and protect airway administer oral glucose 15g or appropriate rapidly absorbed carbohydrate (high sugar content) fluid or food (such as orange juice). Dispense in small amounts; keep fingers out of mouth; EMS provider can lightly massage the area between the cheek and gum to enhance swallowing.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<ol start="3">
<li>If patient is unable to protect airway, administer the following until an improvement in mental status:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. 6.25-25g (62.5-250mL) Dextrose 10% IV/IO</p>
<p>b. Only if Dextrose 10% is not available one of the following methods may be used. Dextrose 10% is the preferred medication.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Mix Dextrose 10% by diluting Dextrose 50% with normal saline to make Dextrose 10%. 1-part D50 and 4 parts normal saline. Ex: 50 mL D50 and 200 mL normal saline makes 250mL D10.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Administer 6.25-25g (12.5-50mL) Dextrose 50% IV/IO.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Administer 6.25-25g (25-100mL) Dextrose 25% IV/IO.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>c. Doses may be repeated if repeat blood glucose assessment remains below levels noted above.</p>
<p>d. Dextrose must be given through a patent IV/IO. If any suspicion of extravasation is present notify receiving Emergency Department.</p>
<p>e. It is acceptable to dilute Dextrose with normal saline due to the high viscosity based on IV size and vein conditions.</p>
<ol start="4">
<li>If unable to establish IV/IO access, administer 1mg Glucagon (Glucagen) IM.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<ol start="5">
<li>
<p>Glucagon (given prior to EMS or by EMS providers) should improve the patient’s level of consciousness within about 10 minutes of administration. However, Glucagon must be followed with some Dextrose either IV/IO, if the patient does not awaken, or orally as noted above.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Treatment with Dextrose via IO device should be a last resort or coincide with a patient that requires an IO for other reasons. All patients with an IO should be seen at an Emergency Department.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>See “Non-Transport of Diabetics” section below for “Treat and Release” Criteria.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Hyperglycemia</p>
<ol>
<li>Glucose Level is greater than 400 mg/dL or glucometer reads “HIGH.”</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<ol start="2">
<li>
<p>If no evidence of pulmonary edema, administer a fluid bolus of 500-1000mL IV/IO during transport.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Place patient on cardiac monitor for possibility of dysrhythmia.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. D10 is made by mixing D50 1:4 with normal saline.</p>
<p>B. D25 is made by mixing D50 1:1 with normal saline.</p>
<p>C. It is very important that you verify that you have a working IV/IO. Dextrose which infiltrates into the surrounding tissues can be damaging to the tissues and blood vessels.</p>
<p>D. Blood glucose level can be measured in mmol/l as well as mg/dl.</p>
<p>Conversion: mmol/l x 18 = mg/dl or mg/dl ÷ 18 = mmol/l</p>
<p>E. In an adrenal insufficiency patient, hypoglycemia can be a sign of adrenal crisis. See M417.</p>
<p>F. Hyperglycemic patients with a BGL &gt; 400 mg/dL often are profoundly hypovolemic. A fluid bolus will start replenishing the volume, encourage diuresis, and facilitate the glucosuria that is already occurring.</p>
<p>G. Hyperglycemia can be secondary to underlying processes such as Sepsis/infection, Myocardial Infarction, Stroke, and trauma, among others. Refer to the respective protocols if you suspect any underlying process.</p>
<h2 id="all-3">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>Non-Transport of Hypoglycemic Patients – Treat and Release Criteria</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Patient must be able to refuse transport as per the SB211 Refusal of Treatment and/or Transport.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Following treatment of a hypoglycemic state, patient is conscious, alert to time, date and place, and requests that they not be transported to the hospital.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Certain patients (see below) should be informed that their hypoglycemic state may not be an isolated issue and it is recommended that they be transported.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Patients with other associated findings of serious illnesses or circumstances that may have contributed to the hypoglycemic episode, including excessive alcohol consumption, shortness of breath, chest pain, headaches, fever, etc.</p>
<p>b. Patients on oral hypoglycemic medication such or long-acting insulin (hypoglycemic episode may last hours or days). Examples:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Oral hypoglycemia medication: glipizide, glyburide, or chlorpropamide.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Intermediate Insulin Types: NPH (Humulin N, Novolin N).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Long-acting Insulin Types: Insulin detemir (Levemir) and insulin glargine (Lantus).</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>c. Patients who when treated with Dextrose take greater than 10 minutes to return to a normal level of consciousness (treatment with other concentrations of dextrose may have different times until resolution of symptoms).</p>
<p>d. Patient’s history does not reveal circumstances that may have contributed to the hypoglycemic episode such as recent illness, lack of oral intake, or insulin reaction.</p>
<ol start="4">
<li>
<p>Repeat rapid glucose test is greater than or equal to 100 mg/dL.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The patient has a repeat systolic blood pressure of at least 100 mm Hg, pulse rate is greater than or equal to 60.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>Protocol for Treat and Release</strong></p>
<ol start="6">
<li>
<p>If the criteria above are met, then the patient is a candidate for Treat and Release.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The patient must be released to the care of a responsible individual who will remain with the patient as an observer for a reasonable time and can request assistance (i.e., Call 911) should the symptoms recur.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The patient should be given instructions for follow-up care prior to being released. They should be able to repeat back the instructions.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Instructions for follow-up care should include the following or similar:</p>
<p>b. Take action to prevent a recurrent episode such as:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Remain in the care of a responsible individual.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Consume a meal immediately.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Monitor their blood glucose.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Advise their personal physician of this episode.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>c. Watch for signs and symptoms of another episode. Those signs and symptoms include:</p>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Anxiousness</td>
<td>Impaired Vision</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Dizziness</td>
<td>Personality Change</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Excessive Sweating</td>
<td>Pounding Heartbeat</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Extreme Hunger</td>
<td>Trembling</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Faintness</td>
<td>Unable to awaken</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Headache</td>
<td>Weakness &amp; Fatigue</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table><p>d. If another episode occurs, request medical assistance (i.e., Call 911) immediately.</p>

