---


---

<h1 id="psychiatric-protocol">Psychiatric Protocol</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is 16 years or older.</p>
<p>B. A medically stable patient who is manifesting unusual behavior including violence, aggression, altered affect, or psychosis. Note, patients exhibiting life-threatening agitation are not considered medically stable. See Lift-Threatening Agitation section below for further detail.</p>
<p>C. Patient demonstrates behavior including violence, delirium, altered effect, psychosis.</p>
<p>D. If obtainable, serum blood sugar greater than or equal to 70 mg/dl (if assessment cannot be obtained prior to physical restraint, then measurement should occur after patient restraint whenever safe or feasible to do so).</p>
<p>E. If obtainable, systolic blood pressure greater than or equal to 90 mm Hg and less than180 mm Hg (if assessment cannot be obtained prior to physical restraint, then measurement should occur after patient restraint whenever safe or feasible to do so).</p>
<p>F. If obtainable, heart rate greater than or equal to 50 bpm (if assessment cannot be obtained prior to physical restraint, then measurement should occur after patient restraint whenever safe or feasible to do so).</p>
<p><strong>II. Exclusion Criteria and Differential Diagnosis</strong></p>
<p>A. Anemia</p>
<p>B. Cerebrovascular accident</p>
<p>C. Drug / Alcohol intoxication</p>
<p>D. Dysrhythmias</p>
<p>E. Electrolyte imbalance</p>
<p>F. Head Trauma</p>
<p>G. Hypertension</p>
<p>H. Hypoglycemia</p>
<p>I. Hypoxia</p>
<p>J. Infection (especially meningitis / encephalitis)</p>
<p>K. Metabolic disorders</p>
<p>L. Myocardial ischemia / infarction</p>
<p>M. Pulmonary Embolism</p>
<p>N. Seizure</p>
<p>O. Shock</p>
<p>P. Life Threatening Agitation</p>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. If EMS personnel have advanced knowledge of a violent or potentially dangerous patient or circumstance, consideration should be given to staging in a strategically convenient but safe area prior to police arrival. If staging is indicated and implemented, dispatch should be notified that EMS is staging, the location of the staging area, and to have police advise EMS when scene is safe for EMS to respond.</p>
<p>B. If EMS intervention is indicated for the violent or combative patient, patients should be gently and cautiously persuaded to follow EMS personnel instructions. If EMS has cause to believe the patient’s ability to exercise an informed refusal is impaired by an existing medical condition, EMS shall, if necessary, cause the patient to be restrained for the purpose of providing the EMS intervention indicated. Such restraint shall, whenever possible, be performed with the assistance of police personnel (see M408 Restraint Protocol). It is recognized that urgent circumstances may necessitate immediate action by EMS prior to the arrival of police.</p>
<ol>
<li>Urgent circumstances requiring immediate action are defined as:</li>
</ol>
<p>i. Patient presents an immediate threat to the safety of self or others.</p>
<p>ii. Patient presents an immediate threat to EMS personnel.</p>
<p>C. Urgent circumstances authorize, but do not obligate, restraint by EMS personnel prior to police arrival. The safety and capabilities of EMS is a primary consideration. Police shall immediately be requested by EMS in any urgent circumstance requiring restraint of a patient by EMS personnel.</p>
<h2 id="oh-all">OH-ALL</h2>
<p>D. If police initiate restraint inconsistent with the medical provisions of the Restraint Protocol, with the intent that EMS will transport the patient, police must prepare to submit an APPLICATION FOR EMERGENCY ADMISSION in accordance with Section 5122.10 ORC, or the patient must be placed under arrest with medical intervention indicated. Police shall, in either instance, accompany EMS to the hospital.</p>
<p>E. APPLICATION FOR EMERGENCY ADMISSION can only be implemented by a:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Psychiatrist</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Licensed clinical psychologist</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Licensed physician</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Health or police officer</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Sheriff or deputy sheriff</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="ky-all">KY-ALL</h2>
<h3 id="this-also-applies-as-in-all">This also applies as IN-ALL</h3>
<p>F. If police initiate restraint inconsistent with the medical provisions of the Psychiatric Protocol M407 and/or Restraint Protocol M408, with the intent that EMS will transport the patient, police must submit written documentation which describes the behavior of the person which caused the peace officer to take the person into custody, or the patient must be placed under arrest with medical intervention indicated. Police shall, in either instance, accompany EMS to the hospital.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>G. EMS shall not be obligated to transport, without an accompanying police officer, any patient who is currently violent, exhibiting violent tendencies, or has a history indicating a reasonable expectation that the patient will become violent.</p>
<p>H. If the patient is medically stable, then he/she may be transported by police in the following circumstances:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Patient has normal orientation to person, place, time, and situation.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient has no evidence of medical illness or injury.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient has exhibited behavior consistent with mental illness.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>Life-Threatening Agitation</strong></p>
<p>A. Agitation is a non-specific mental state that can be seen in various clinical situations and be a result of various stimuli (psychiatric illness, substance use, new environments, medical conditions). When the state of agitation includes metabolic derangement (ie. acidosis) causing pathologic changes (ie. respiratory depression), this is considered <strong>life-threatening agitation</strong>. In this state, the patient is at risk of disability or death if not appropriately recognized or treated. <strong>Life-threatening agitation</strong> is a critical syndrome for EMS providers to be familiar with, recognize, and know how to treat.</p>
<p>B. Signs and symptoms of life-threatening agitation may include (note, this list is not all-inclusive):</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Bizarre, aggressive behavior.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Elevated body temperature.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Fear and Panic.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Excessive tear production.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Nakedness or desire to remove clothing.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Head trauma.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Dilated pupils.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Incoherent speech.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Profuse sweating.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Shivering.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Hypoglycemia.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Life-threatening agitation should be treated in a similar fashion to all other forms of agitation with attempts at verbal de-escalation, when possible, followed by chemical sedation and physical restraint, if necessary.</p>
<p>A key symptom to the potential onset of sudden death from life-threatening agitation is “instant tranquility.” The patient who was initially very violent and combative suddenly becomes calm and docile. This is a serious and ominous sign; patient should be constantly monitored and transported for further evaluation by EMS.</p>

