# Restraint Protocol

  

**I. I****NCLUSION** **C****RITERIA**

A. Patient’s age is 16 years or older.

B. This protocol is intended to address the need for medically indicated and necessary restraint. It shall not be used to regulate, or restrict in any way, operational guidelines adopted by a provider agency addressing use of force related to non-medical circumstances (i.e., civil disturbances, legitimate self-defense relative to criminal behavior).

C. Patient restraints are to be used only when necessary and in situations where the patient is violent or potentially violent and may be a danger to themselves or others. EMS providers must remember that aggressive or violent behavior may be a symptom of a medical condition including, but not limited to:

1. Anemia

2. Cerebrovascular accident

3. Drug / Alcohol intoxication

4. Dysrhythmias

5. Electrolyte imbalance

6. Head Trauma

7. Hypertension

8. Hypoglycemia

9. Hypoxia

10. Infection (especially meningitis / encephalitis)

11. Metabolic disorders

12. Myocardial ischemia / infarction

13. Pulmonary Embolism

14. Seizure

15. Shock

16. Toxicological ingestion

**II. PROTOCOL**

A. Patient health care management remains the responsibility of the EMS provider. The method of restraint shall not restrict the adequate monitoring of vital signs, ability to protect the patient's airway, compromise peripheral neurovascular status or otherwise prevent appropriate and necessary therapeutic measures. It is recognized that the evaluation of many patient parameters requires patient cooperation and thus may be difficult or impossible.

B. It is recommended to have Law Enforcement on scene.

C. Refer to Psychiatric Emergencies Protocol (M407) for aid in dealing with the combative patient.

D. **The least restrictive means shall be employed.**

E. Verbal de-escalation

1. Speak in a calm, normal volume voice. Engage the patient by their name.

2. Validate the patient’s feelings by verbalizing the behaviors the patient is exhibiting and attempt to help the patient recognize these behaviors as threatening.

3. Openly communicate, explaining everything that has occurred, everything that will occur, and why the imminent actions are required.

4. Respect the patient’s personal space (i.e., asking permission to touch the patient, take pulse, examine patient, etc.).

**III. PHYSICAL RESTRAINTS**

A. All restraints should be easily removable by EMS personnel without the use of a key.

B. Restraints should be secured to the stretcher and not to the vehicle.

C. EMS should only use purpose-built restraints following the manufacturer’s instructions.

D. Seatbelts and cot straps should not be modified or used as medical restraints.

E. Restraints applied by law enforcement (i.e., handcuffs) require a law enforcement officer to remain available to adjust the restraints as necessary for the patient's safety. The protocol is not intended to negate the ability for law enforcement personnel to use appropriate restraint equipment to establish scene control. Handcuffs should not be applied to the stretcher or other equipment and should only be applied to the patient by law enforcement.

F. Departments are encouraged to work with their respective law enforcement agencies to develop restraint processes that respect patient and provider safety and comfort, while permitting medical care. The goal is to maximize safety to the provider while providing care to the patient.

G. To ensure adequate respiratory and circulatory monitoring and management, patients shall NOT be transported in a face down prone position.

H. Restrained extremities should be monitored for color, nerve, and motor function, pulse quality and capillary refill at the time of application and at least every 5 minutes. Providers should document every 5 minutes a GCS/AVPU score along with vital signs. If vitals are unable to be obtained because of agitation, this should be noted.

## Medic

  

**IV. C****HEMICAL** **R****ESTRAINTS**

A. Chemical restraints may be required before, after, or in place of physical restraints. Any patient who continues to be a danger to themselves or others despite physical restraints, or those who present a danger while attempting physical restraint, may be chemically restrained as follows.

1. Determine and document the patient’s level of agitation using the RASS scale.

	0 – Alert and Calm
	
	+1 – Restless: Anxious. Apprehensive but movements are not aggressive or vigorous

	+2 – Agitated: uncooperative; resists care; frequent non-purposeful movement

	+3 – Very agitated: cannot focus, pulls/removes IVs/canula; fights environment

	+4 – Combative: violent, immediate danger to staff

2. EMS should plan and prepare for advanced airway management regardless of medication used. In patients receiving ketamine, laryngospasm or hypersalivation necessitating oral suctioning may occur.

3. For RASS +2: consider midazolam (Versed) 5 mg IM. For smaller adults and the elderly consider lower dose.

4. For RASS +3: Administer midazolam (Versed) 10 mg IM. A lower dose of 5mg IM may be used for smaller adults or the elderly. Exposure and cleaning of skin is highly recommended but may not be feasible; injection through clothing and prior to skin cleaning is allowed if crew safety would otherwise be compromised. Repeat dose(s) of midazolam (Versed) may be ordered by on-line medical control. Ensure that the on-line medical control physician understands the level of agitation the patient is experiencing and whether this compromises patient or provider safety.

5. For RASS +4: consider administering ketamine 4mg/kg IM ideal body weight or as indicated in the chart below (of at least 50mg/1mL concentration), instead of midazolam (Versed), once into a large muscle when possible. Exposure and cleaning of skin is highly recommended but may not be feasible; injection through clothing and prior to skin cleaning is allowed if crew safety would be compromised.

a. Patients that have ketamine administered should only be taken to a hospital-based Emergency Department, which does not include UC PES.

6. When able and safe, place patient on cardiac monitor, continuous pulse oximetry and ETCO2.

7. When able and safe, administer oxygen to correct hypoxia <95%.

8. When able and safe, check blood glucose level.

9. When chemical restraint is used, vitals, including GCS/AVPU should be assessed and recorded every 5 minutes.

10. At no time shall a patient be left unattended after receiving chemical restraint.

11. Any patient receiving chemical restraint must be attended to and transported by a paramedic.

12. Pre-arrival notification is highly recommended so the receiving Emergency Department can be prepared for the safe transfer of a combative or violent patient.

| _Ketamine_  | _RASS +4_            | _(Combative)_     | _Dosing_           |
|-------------|----------------------|-------------------|--------------------|
| **Height**  | **Dose (IM) 4mg/kg** | **mLs (50mg/mL)** | **mLs (100mg/mL)** |
| _______     | _______              | _______           | _______            |
| <4'11"      | 150mg                | 3mL               | 1.5mL              |
| 5'-5'5"     | 220mg                | 4.4mL             | 2.2mL              |
| 5'6"-5'11"  | 290mg                | 5.8mL             | 2.9mL              |
| 6'-6'5"     | 365mg                | 7.3mL             | 3.65mL             |
| >6'5"       | 425mg                | 8.5mL             | 4.25mL             |
| **Ideally** | **should be given**  | **in more than**  | **one site.**      |

## ALL

  

**V. D****OCUMENTATION** **O****F** **R****ESTRAINTS**

A. Patient restraint shall be documented on the run sheet and address any or all the following appropriate criteria:

1. That an emergency existed and the need for treatment was explained to the patient.

2. That the patient refused treatment or was unable to consent to treatment (such as unconscious patient).

3. Evidence of the patient's incompetence (or inability to refuse treatment).

4. Failure of less restrictive methods of restraint (e.g., if conscious, failure of verbal attempts to convince the patient to consent to treat).

5. Assistance of law enforcement officials with restraints, or orders from medical control to restrain the patient, or any exigent circumstances requiring immediate action, or adherence to system restraint protocols.

6. That the treatment and/or restraint were for the patient's benefit and safety.

7. The type of restraint employed (soft, mechanical, chemical).

8. Any injuries that occurred during or after the restraint.

9. The limbs restrained ("four points").

10. Position in which the patient was restrained.

11. Circulation checks every 5 minutes or less (document findings and time).

12. The behavior and/or mental status of the patient before and after the restraint.

## Medic

**NOTES:**

1. Intramuscular midazolam is more rapidly absorbed than other benzodiazepines, including diazepam and lorazepam, making it uniquely ideal for treatment of the acutely agitated patient. Onset 5-10 minutes.

2. Midazolam is as effective as haloperidol in acutely agitated and combative patients (Am J Emerg Med 8:97) and has less potential cardiovascular side effects and drug-drug interactions than haloperidol.

3. Respiratory depression is a known side effect of benzodiazepines and ketamine. Monitor and treat respiratory depression as needed. The use of flumazenil is not recommended and is potentially harmful because it may cause uncontrollable seizures. The risk of harm is especially present when the patient history is unknown, unclear, or incomplete.

4. Midazolam may be administered intranasal (IN); however, its efficacy in agitated and combative patients is unknown.

5. Use of benzodiazepines, including intramuscular Midazolam, for acutely agitated and combative patients is supported by American College of Emergency Physicians clinical policy [Ann Emerg Med 47(1): 79, 2006].

6. In rare cases, patients receiving ketamine for chemical restraint may experience an emergence delirium. This is characterized by: hallucinations, flashbacks, unusual thoughts, extreme fear, excitement, and irrational behavior. If this occurs, immediately contact medical control. Treatment typically is a small dose of a benzodiazepine but must be approved by medical control.

7. Positional asphyxia has been implicated in prior restraint-associated deaths. The patient must be given adequate room and positioning to avoid interfering with normal respiration. Patients while restrained or sedated should never be transported prone, hog-tied, compressed, or otherwise prevented from repositioning to ensure adequate normal respiration.

8. Agencies opting to utilize ketamine are suggested to have training on its’ indications,  contraindications, side effects, and dosing. Robust medical director support is recommended.

9. Ketamine use for pre-hospital chemical restraint is supported by ACEP and NAEMSP. [ACEP task force report on hyperactive delirium with severe agitation in emergency settings. (2021)] and [PHEC 21(3): 395-6, (2017)]
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNjIzNjUzMDk3XX0=
-->