---


---

<h1 id="allergic-reaction---anaphylaxis">Allergic Reaction - Anaphylaxis</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p>I. Inclusion Criteria</p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is 16 years or older.</p>
<p>B. Suspected exposure to allergen (insect sting, medications, foods, or chemicals).</p>
<p>C. Patient has or complains of any of the following:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Respiratory difficulty</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Wheezing or stridor</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Tightness in chest or throat, weakness, or nausea.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Flushing, hives, itching, or swelling.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Anxiety or restlessness.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Pulse greater than 100 or Systolic Blood Pressure less than 80 mm Hg.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Gastrointestinal symptoms</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Swelling of the face, lips, or tongue</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>II. <strong>Anaphylaxis Definition</strong></p>
<p>A. Serious, rapid onset (minutes to hours) reaction to a suspected trigger <strong>AND</strong></p>
<p>B. Two or more body systems involved (e.g., skin/mucosa, cardiovascular, respiratory, GI) OR</p>
<p>C. Hemodynamic instability OR</p>
<p>D. Respiratory compromise</p>
<p>III. Protocol</p>
<p>A. Maintain airway and administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
<p>B. <strong>Airway assessment and management are extremely important since airway compromise may develop rapidly at any time during the call.</strong></p>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<p>C. Request ALS back-up for a patient who has any of the following:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Hypotension</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Tachycardia</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Noisy/difficult breathing (including but not limited to wheezing &amp; stridor)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Received epinephrine by auto-injector, if indicated</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Determine if the patient has a prescribed epinephrine auto-injector (EpiPen, EpiPen Jr.) and/or albuterol metered dose inhaler available. Even if the patient’s condition does not warrant medication at the time, before you leave the scene, ask to take them and any spares for the trip to the hospital. This allows for treatment enroute if the patient’s condition should warrant or if a second dose is ordered by medical command.</p>
<p>E. Some patients may have multiple-dose auto-injectors.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>F. Remove allergen if possible (stinger from skin, etc).</p>
<p>G. Check vital signs frequently, reactions may quickly grow more severe.</p>
<h2 id="emt-1">EMT</h2>
<p>H. For patients with anaphylaxis, epinephrine should be administered as soon as possible.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>For patients who have been prescribed an auto-injector administer it in accordance with manufacturer’s directions after obtaining patient consent.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If there is no patient-supplied auto-injector immediately available, you may administer an EMS supplied auto-injector in accordance with the manufacturer’s directions after obtaining patient consent.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>In the absence of auto-injectors, EMT’s may administer IM epinephrine is trained on, and approved by the medical director, as below.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Auto-injector and EMT IM administration may be repeated every 5 – 15 minutes as needed.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>I. If epinephrine auto-injector is to be administered, then:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Assure injector is prescribed for the patient. (If patient’s personal injector).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Check medication for expiration date.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Check medication for cloudiness or discoloration.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Remove safety cap from injector.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Select appropriate injection site (see notes). If possible, remove clothing from the injection site. If removing the clothing would take too much time, the auto-injector can be administered through clothing.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Push injector firmly against site.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Hold injector against the site for a minimum of ten seconds.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Keep injector to give to hospital personnel upon arrival.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>K. Administer epinephrine 0.3 ml (1 mg/ml) intramuscularly (IM) if patient is in anaphylaxis. (See notes) May repeat dose every 5 – 15 minutes as needed.</p>
<p>L. Monitor cardiac rhythm.</p>
<p>M. If bronchospasm or wheezing is present, administer albuterol (Proventil) 2.5mg via nebulizer, and treat per Respiratory Distress protocol M403. Albuterol may be used without preceding epinephrine in patients with isolated, very minimal respiratory symptoms.</p>
<p>N. Initiate IV access. If the patient is hypotensive, begin 1-liter normal saline IV wide open.</p>
<p>O. Administer diphenhydramine 25 - 50 mg IV/IM/PO. Diphenhydramine may be used without preceding epinephrine in patients with isolated rash and no other symptoms.</p>
<p>P. If hypotension still persists, consider SB205 Hypotension/Shock. If push-dose IV epinephrine initiated, discontinue IM dosing.</p>
<p>Q. For persistent symptoms in a patient taking a β-blocker, consider 1 mg glucagon IM/IV.</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. Anterolateral thigh is the preferred IM administration site for 1mg/ml epi autoinjector. Other sites may be used if preferred site would cause unneeded delay. Absorption is fastest with IM injection in the thigh.</p>

