---


---

<h1 id="seizure">Seizure</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. INCLUSION CRITERIA</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is 16 years or older.</p>
<p>B. Patient has a decreased Level of Consciousness (GCS less than 15).</p>
<p>II. <strong>DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS</strong></p>
<p>A. Refer to Altered Level of Consciousness Protocol.</p>
<p>B. Identify and rule out possible causes.</p>
<p>III. <strong>PHYSICAL FINDINGS (ONE OR MORE)</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient suspected to have had grand mal seizure based upon description of eyewitnesses, incontinence of urine or stool, or history of previous seizures.</p>
<p>B. Patient may or may not have current seizure activity.</p>
<p>C. May have altered mental status.</p>
<p>D. May be incontinent of urine or stool.</p>
<p>E. May be salivating.</p>
<p>F. May have depressed respiratory status.</p>
<p>IV. <strong>PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p>A. Maintain airway and administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
<p>B. Assess for spinal injuries and treat/immobilize appropriately. Refer to Spinal Motion Restriction Protocol T704.</p>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<p>C. If available, request ALS back-up for a patient who meets one or more of the following criteria:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Is actively seizing.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Has been seizing for 15 minutes or longer.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Has airway compromise.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Has had more than two seizures without gaining consciousness.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Has a history of diabetes and is seizing.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Is in the third trimester of pregnancy and seizing.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>D. Administration via the IM route is preferred in all cases, but if patient is actively seizing administer midazolam (Versed) IM.</p>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Medication</th>
<th>Route</th>
<th>Dose</th>
<th>Frequency</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>midazolam</td>
<td>IN</td>
<td>5-10mg</td>
<td>Every 10 minutes until seizure stops, max 10mg</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>midazolam</td>
<td>IM</td>
<td>10mg</td>
<td>single dose</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>midazolam</td>
<td>IV/IO</td>
<td>2-5mg</td>
<td>Every 10 minutes until seizure resolves, max 10mg</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table><ol>
<li>Be prepared to support the patient’s respirations and place patient on continuous ETCO2 monitoring.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>E. Check Glucose per M406.</p>
<p>F. Place on Cardiac monitor if available.</p>
<p>G. If suspicious for overdose refer to M411 Toxicological Emergencies.</p>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>o If seizures develop for the first time in a patient over the age of 50, suspect a cardiac cause.</p>
<p>o Trauma to the tongue is unlikely to cause serious problems, but trauma to the teeth may. Attempts to force an airway into the patient’s mouth can completely obstruct the airway. Use of a nasopharyngeal airway may be helpful.</p>
<p>o Most seizures that patients experience are self-limited to 1-3 minutes and will need only oxygen and attention to airway management and will not need treatment with Versed (midazolam).</p>
<p>o Each department should have training on using Intranasal Versed with an atomizer device. This route may take longer for a response than the IV method.</p>
<p>o Be aware that rectal Valium (Diastat) may have been administered to some patients with known seizure disorders prior to EMS arrival. Adding Versed on top of rectal Valium will exacerbate respiratory depression.</p>

