---


---

<h1 id="hypothermia-and-cold-emergencies">Hypothermia and Cold Emergencies</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p>I. <strong>Definitions</strong></p>
<p>A. True hypothermia is a body temperature less than 95° F (35°C).</p>
<p>B. Mild hypothermia is a body temperature from 86 to 93°F (30-34°C).</p>
<p>C. Severe hypothermia is less than 86°F (less than 30°C).</p>
<p>II. <strong>Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patients of all ages</p>
<p>B. High risk groups: elderly, infants, outdoor workers, homeless individuals, patients with central nervous system disorders and alcoholics/drug abusers.</p>
<p>C. Predisposing factors</p>
<ol>
<li>Decrease of body heat due to:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Prolonged exposure to cold</p>
<p>b. Inadequate clothing</p>
<p>c. Intoxication</p>
<p>d. Illness and injury</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Decrease heat production due to:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Malnutrition</p>
<p>b. Endocrine disorders</p>
<ol start="3">
<li>Impaired thermoregulation due to:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Hypoglycemia</p>
<p>b. Alcohol or drug abuse (barbiturates, phenothiazines)</p>
<p>c. Sepsis</p>
<p>d. Central nervous system disorders</p>
<p>D. Hypothermia can occur under relatively mild weather conditions.</p>
<p>E. Variable presentations with a range of presenting symptoms from mild non-specific complaints to unresponsiveness.</p>
<p>F. Mild symptoms include decreases in coordination, reflexes, and alertness.</p>
<p>G. If unresponsive, the patient may appear pulseless with pupils fixed and dilated.</p>
<p>H. Pulse rate may be severely bradycardic making a radial pulse difficult to palpate. Pulse rates should be obtained with palpation of central pulses, carotid or femoral, for at least one minute.</p>
<p>I. Extremities may be stiff and resemble rigor mortis or they may be cyanotic or edematous (Frost bite).</p>
<p>J. Altered/decreased mental status.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>K. Bradycardia</p>
<p>L. If the core temperature falls below 89.6°F (32°C), a characteristic “J” wave, Osborne wave, can be seen. The J wave occurs at the junction of the QRS complex and the ST segment.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>III. <strong>Differential Diagnosis</strong></p>
<p>A. Cardiac arrest</p>
<p>B. Coma</p>
<p>C. Narcotic abuse</p>
<p>D. Severe shock</p>
<p>IV. <strong>Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Gentle handling of the patient is important to avoid introducing ventricular fibrillation.</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>B. If a rapid glucose test is less than 60 mg/dL, refer to M406 or P608.</p>
<p>C. If considering opiate overdoes, refer to M411 Toxicological Emergencies.</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p>D. Absent pulse and breathing</p>
<ol>
<li>Follow Cardiac Arrest Protocol SB204.</li>
</ol>
<p>a) Continue CPR.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>
<p>Defibrillate normally.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Maintain airway and administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%. If available heat air to 108-115°F (42-46°C).</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<ol start="4">
<li>If available request ALS.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-3">ALL</h2>
<ol start="5">
<li>
<p>If possible, a patient’s temperature should be documented.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Notify the receiving hospital.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>F. Spontaneous respirations and pulses</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Maintain airway and administer oxygen. (Heated to 42 C – 46 C {108 F – 115 F} if possible).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If the patient is unconscious and not able to protect their airway, refer to Airway Protocol T705.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-2">Medic</h2>
<ol start="3">
<li>
<p>Initiate IV/IO access and begin to administer 1 Liter of normal saline (child 20 ml/kg) fluid bolus.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Monitor cardiac rhythm.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-4">ALL</h2>
<ol start="5">
<li>Notify the receiving hospital.</li>
</ol>
<p>G. Do not massage extremities as it will cause increased cutaneous vasodilatation and decrease shivering.</p>
<p>H. Do not use hot packs, these can cause serious burns as well as possibly increase mortality.</p>
<p>I. Gentle evacuation is needed. Remove the victim from the cold environment, remove wet clothing, insulate with dry warm covering, cover patient’s head (not face) and immobilize the patient to prevent exertion by patient.</p>
<p>J. If patient also presents with frost bite:</p>
<p>• Protect injured areas.</p>
<p>• Remove clothing and jewelry from injured parts.</p>
<p>• Do not attempt to thaw injured parts with local heat.</p>
<p>• Maintain core temperature.</p>
<p>• Severe frost bite should be transported to a burn center.</p>
<h2 id="medic-3">Medic</h2>
<p>• Consider vascular access and consider warmed fluids.</p>
<p>• Apply cardiac monitor.</p>
<p>• For pain relief when the patient is conscious, alert, not hypotensive, and is complaining of severe pain, consider pain management protocol S505 and P611.</p>

