---


---

<h1 id="hyperthermia-and-heat-related-emergencies">Hyperthermia and Heat Related Emergencies</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patients of all ages</p>
<p>B. High risk groups: elderly, infants, outdoor workers, and athletes.</p>
<p>C. Impaired thermoregulation due to:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Hypoglycemia</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Drugs (Anticholinergics, phenothiazines, antidepressants, diuretics)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Infection</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Central nervous system disorders.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Hyperthermia can occur with strenuous physical exertion and/or severe environmental conditions.</p>
<p><strong>II. Physical Findings</strong></p>
<p>A. Variable presentations with a range of presenting symptoms from mild nonspecific complaints to unresponsiveness.</p>
<p>B. Heat cramps are characterized by:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Muscle cramps</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Hyperventilation</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Heat exhaustion is characterized by:</p>
<ol>
<li>Volume depletion, sweating</li>
<li>Tachycardia</li>
<li>Fatigue</li>
<li>Hyperventilation</li>
<li>Lightheadedness</li>
<li>Hypotension</li>
<li>Headache</li>
<li>Body temperature may be normal</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Heat Stroke is a true medical emergency, it is characterized by:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Elevated temperature, usually &gt;104 F</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Neurological symptoms:</p>
<ol>
<li>Syncope</li>
<li>Irritability</li>
<li>Combativeness</li>
<li>Bizarre Behavior</li>
<li>Hallucinations</li>
<li>Hemiplegia</li>
<li>Seizures</li>
<li>Coma</li>
<li>Decorticate/decerebrate posturing</li>
</ol>
</li>
<li>
<p>Classic lack of sweating can be delayed.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Remove patient from external heat sources and remove patient’s clothing.</p>
<p>B. If possible, document a temperature. Rectal temperatures are the gold standard for EMS core temperatures. Other sources of temperature are not reliable.</p>
<p>C. Patients without a temperature recorded, but heat stroke is suspected, cool until mental status returns. Consider dilutional hyponatremia as a possible alternate diagnosis.</p>
<p>D. Promote evaporative cooling by positioning fans close to undressed patient and spraying patient with tepid water. <strong>Do Not</strong> cover patient with wetted sheets as this will impair evaporation.</p>
<p>E. Promote conductive cooling by applying ice bags, if available, to hands, feet, face.</p>
<p>F. In cases of heat stroke, the patient should be cooled as quickly as possible. Immersion cooling is the most effective method to lower core body temperature. If the resources are readily available (ex. ice bath, swimming pool, tarp, body bag) and no other emergency intervention is needed (seizure, airway compromise, etc.), then it is preferable to cool the patient prior to transport.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>G. Establish IV access.</p>
<p>H. Apply cardiac monitor.</p>
<p>I. If patient appears dehydrated administer 500-1000 ml saline bolus or 20 mL/kg for children. Heat cramps and heat exhaustion patients can be given oral rehydration if appropriate.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>J. When core temperature (if available) reaches 101°F (38°C) discontinue cooling efforts to prevent “overshoot” hypothermia. In the absence of recorded temperature, cool until mental status improves or 20 minutes of active cooling have elapsed. Call medical control if the patient’s mental status has not improved after 20 minutes of active cooling.</p>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>There is no minimum body temperature for heat related illnesses. Patients can be normo-thermic with heat cramps and heat exhaustion but are usually hyperthermic with heat stroke.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Many patients with classic heat stroke are not dehydrated, while exertional heat stroke and heat exhaustion patients usually are.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Measuring core temperature in the prehospital setting is difficult and does not correlate well to skin/temporal/tympanic temperature.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If the conditions for on-site cooling are not met, particularly if the patient has additional problems requiring medical intervention, the patient should be transported immediately to the closest ED. Cooling should be initiated during transport in the most effective manner possible.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p><strong>COOL FIRST TRANSPORT SECOND</strong></p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Dilutional hyponatremia may look like heat stroke in persons drinking free water</p>
</li>
</ol>

