---


---

<h1 id="stroke">Stroke</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>The PDF version of this protocol contains an image-based flowchart.</strong></p>
<p><strong>Please refer to the PDF version of this protocol.</strong></p>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. Refer to ED Capability Survey for stroke center certifications.</p>
<p>B. Stroke Center means one of the following: Joint Commission Certified Comprehensive (CSC), Thrombectomy-Capable Stroke Center (TSC), Primary Stroke Center (PSC), Acute Stroke Ready Hospital (ASRH).</p>
<p>C. The <strong>Last Known Well time</strong> is the time that the patient, or others, confirm that they were completely normal (or normal for them) prior to the onset of symptoms. This is NOT the time that the patient or bystanders first noted symptoms. If a patient woke up with symptoms present, then establish the last time the patient was noted to be at their baseline prior to going to sleep. (For example, the patient may have woken up in the middle of the night to go to the bathroom. This is the last known normal time.) If possible, bring a witness of last known normal time to the ED with the patient, and/or gather their contact information for the Stroke Team.</p>
<p>D. <strong>Time of Symptom Discovery</strong> refers to the time at which the symptoms were first noticed by a reliable witness. These terms are often mistakenly used interchangeably, and so explicit capture of both ensures accuracy. Among patients with a witnessed stroke onset, these two times will be the same.</p>
<p>E. Patients who experience transient ischemic attack (TIA) develop most of the same signs and symptoms as those who are experiencing a stroke. The signs and symptoms of TIAs can last from minutes up to one day. Thus the patient may initially present with typical signs and symptoms of a stroke, but those findings may progressively resolve. The patient needs to be transported to the hospital for further evaluation.</p>
<p>F. Some patients who have had a stroke may be unable to communicate but can understand what is being said around them.</p>
<p>G. Place the patient’s affected or paralyzed extremity in a secure and safe position during patient movement and transport.</p>
<p>H. In general, hypertension in stroke patients should not be treated in the prehospital setting. Treatment should only be at the direction of online medical control.</p>
<p>I. Do not discount rapid transport just because the “window” is over; allow the ED to determine timeframes for treatment.</p>
<p>J. Patients under 16 years of age, consider preferential transport to Cincinnati Children’s Hospital.</p>
<p>K. A Mobile Stroke Unit (MSU) is able to diagnose and treat acute ischemic stroke and intracranial hemorrhage patients and may be an available prehospital resource for patients with suspected stroke. EMS may hand-off patient care to the MSU in the same way an ED hand-off occurs. If the MSU is en route but not yet on scene, EMS will assess the risk/benefit of immediate transport vs. a minor extension of scene time. The &lt;15-minute scene time guidance does not apply to the MSU.</p>
<p>L. Stroke stickers should be used to improve communications between EMS and the hospital.</p>
<p><strong>References:</strong></p>
<p>American Heart Association. American Heart Association Mission Lifeline: Stroke Severity-based Stroke Triage Algorithm for EMS. 2020; <a href="https://www.heart.org/-/media/files/professional/quality-improvement/mission-lifeline/2_25_2020/ds15698-qi-ems-algorithm_update-2142020.pdf?la=en">https://www.heart.org/-/media/files/professional/quality-improvement/mission-lifeline/2_25_2020/ds15698-qi-ems-algorithm_update-2142020.pdf?la=en</a>. Accessed July 7, 2020.</p>

