---


---

<h1 id="patients-with-pre-existing-medical-devicesdrug-administrations">Patients with Pre-Existing Medical Devices/Drug Administrations</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. INCLUSION CRITERIA</strong></p>
<p>A. Patients of any age.</p>
<p>B. Patient has a Pre-Existing Medical Device or Drug Administrations.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Prehospital patient with a pre-existing physician-ordered medical device or drug administration (“MDDA”) not covered in the provider’s scope of practice.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>These may include but are not limited to: ventilatory adjuncts (CPAP, BiPAP), continuous or intermittent IV medication infusions (analgesics, antibiotics, chemotherapeutic agents, vasopressors, cardiac drugs), and nontraditional out-of-hospital drug infusion routes (subcutaneous infusaports, central venous access lines, direct subcutaneous infusions, self-contained implanted pumps).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient may have implanted adjuncts or other accompanying mechanical devices.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>II. PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p>A. When encountering a patient who has medical treatments that a Prehospital Provider has not been trained on it is the responsibility of the provider to determine the best course of treatment by utilizing (but not limited to) the following resources:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>The patient themselves.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The patient’s family.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Online Medical Control.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>MDDA product literature/company representative (in person or via telecommunication).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Other patient care staff such as MD, RN, LPN, CNA, etc.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Any other individual who has been trained in the specific care of the patient (i.e., Day Care Worker).</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<ol start="7">
<li>EMT-Basics should request ALS back-up or intercept if they feel the patient’s condition and needs exceed or may exceed their level of care.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>B. Pre-existing MDDA functioning normally:</p>
<ol>
<li>The Prehospital Provider should provide usual care and transportation while maintaining the pre-existing MDDA.</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Pre-existing MDDA not functioning normally:</p>
<ol>
<li>Provider is to determine if it is in the patient’s best interest to re-establish the treatment or allow the preexisting MDDA to remain as found. The Prehospital Provider is to take all reasonable steps to support the course of treatment decided upon.</li>
</ol>
<p>D. The best course of treatment may include medication administrations outside the provider’s normal operations and prior training.</p>
<ol>
<li>The Prehospital Provider is to determine the appropriate course of medical administration by utilizing available resources.</li>
</ol>
<p>E. If appropriate transport any extra resources/persons with the patient.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Some medications may not be safe for an EMT-Basic or Paramedic to continue to administer without accompaniment by appropriately trained personnel most likely from a treatment clinic. If no personnel will accompany the EMS crew, discontinue medication administration. (Ex: Chemotherapy)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If transporting a patient from the care of a higher-level provider the Prehospital Providers may, if comfortable, use on-scene training during transport without the accompaniment of the higher-level provider (MD, RN). The Prehospital Providers have the right to request the higher-level provider accompany the patient during transport.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>III. SPECIAL SITUATIONS</strong></p>
<p>A. Ventricular Assist Devices (LVAD, RVAD, BiVAD)</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Appropriate interventions vary by device, recommend using a reference such as the Mechanical Circulatory Support Organization EMS Guide.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Always contact the appropriate VAD program coordinator</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center 513-926-6788</p>
<p>b. St. Elizabeth 859-301-4823</p>
<p>c. The Christ Hospital 859-572-1609</p>
<p>d. TriHealth 513-865-5823</p>
<p>e. University of Cincinnati Medical Center 513-264-3841</p>
<ol start="3">
<li>
<p><strong>The VAD program may be difficult to reach during the time constraints of EMS care. If unable to contact the patient’s VAD Program coordinator immediately, contact medical control at receiving ED.</strong></p>
</li>
<li>
<p><strong>See VAD Algorithm on the next page.</strong></p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Adrenal Insufficiency – follow M417</p>
<p><strong>NOTES:</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>This protocol intends to supply the framework for Prehospital Providers to support existing medical care to provide the best outcome for patient.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Under Ohio Scope of Practice EMT-Paramedics are listed as capable of “Medication administration (Protocol approved).” This protocol serves to provide this capability for patients with a pre-existing MDDA. EMT-Basics cannot exceed their particular scope of medications for patient care.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>In the ever-evolving realm of medical care, it is not practical to create specific guidelines for each individual pre-existing MDDA, the provider should utilize all resources necessary to assist with patient care.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Some hospitals/emergency departments are not equipped to handle complications of certain pre-existing MDDAs. The provider should make an effort to transport to the appropriate facility based on each particular patient’s situation.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p><strong>This protocol is NOT intended to give EMT-Basics or Paramedics authorization to attempt procedures or administer medicines outside of a patient’s previously established course of care as determined by a physician</strong>.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For patients with a Central Venous Access Device in situations requiring emergent venous access due to patient’s life being in imminent danger or if patient is in cardio-respiratory arrest refer to the protocol, T703 Emergency Access of CVAD.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The best way to handle patients with special situations is proper identification and pre-incident planning. This will allow for the appropriate training and potential to carry pertinent supplies and information should they be needed.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>The PDF version of this protocol contains an image-based flowchart on VAD emergency assessment and interventions.  It cannot be reproduced in this format.</strong></p>
<p><strong>Please refer to the PDF version of the protocols for the flowchart.</strong></p>

