---


---

<h1 id="over-the-counter-medication-administration">Over-the-Counter Medication Administration</h1>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. The patient expressly requests treatment for a minor medical concern by a specific over the counter (OTC) medication.</p>
<p>B. No sign or symptom of a significant medical condition exists.</p>
<p>C. The paramedic has access to the official manufacturer’s list of indications, contraindications, and administration instructions.</p>
<p><strong>II. Definition</strong></p>
<p>A. OTC medications are those that can be obtained by non-medical personnel without prescription.</p>
<p>B. These may include, but are not necessarily limited to:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>NSAIDS (ibuprofen and naproxen)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Acetaminophen</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Antihistamines</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Decongestants</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Antacids</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Loperamide</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Antibiotic ointment</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Medication allergies, current medications, and medical diagnoses must be reviewed immediately prior to medication administration.</p>
<p>B. OTC medications may be used only for those conditions indicated in writing on the medication’s original manufacturer’s packaging and insert.</p>
<p>C. OTC medications should not be used if any contraindications / warnings indicated on the medication’s original manufacturer’s packaging and/or insert apply.</p>
<p>D. OTC medications should ONLY be used in dosages and frequencies indicated on the medication’s original manufacturer’s packaging and/or insert.</p>
<p>E. Official documentation should be produced and maintained for ALL medical care rendered in the course of a paramedic’s duties.</p>
<p>F. This documentation should include, at a minimum: patient identifier, complaint, medical history including allergies and medications, evaluation performed, and treatment rendered.</p>
<p>G. This protocol is not intended for use with patients being transported to the hospital, but instead for patients seeking care at “special events” where paramedics are stationed or for emergency personnel on critical scene assignments.</p>

