---


---

<h1 id="adrenal-insufficiency">Adrenal Insufficiency</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Definitions</strong></p>
<p>A. <em>Adrenal Insufficiency (AI)</em> – potentially life-threatening condition in which the adrenal glands do not produce sufficient quantities of the hormone’s cortisol and aldosterone. Addison’s Disease and Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia are two forms of the disease.</p>
<p>B. <em>Adrenal Crisis</em> – life threatening condition in which someone with AI fails to mount an adequate response to acute physiologic stress.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Early symptoms – non-specific, may resemble viral illness or hypoglycemia.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Late symptoms – altered mental status, hypotension, hypoglycemia, seizures, dysrhythmia, cardiopulmonary failure.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>II. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. All patients with known diagnosis of AI who exhibit signs/symptoms of adrenal crisis.</p>
<p>B. Evidence of AI diagnosis may include medical alert tags, patient, or family statement, notes or care description letter from physician, possession of injectable corticosteroids for self or family administration.</p>
<p><strong>III. PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p>A. If available, allow patient/family to SELF-ADMINISTER steroid therapy (usually in the form of injectable hydrocortisone sodium succinate / Solu Cortef 100mg IM).</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>B. If self-administration not possible or undesirable, immediately give:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Solu-Medrol (Methylprednisolone) 125 mg IM/IV/IO (Adult).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Solu-Medrol (Methylprednisolone) 2 mg/kg IM/IV/IO (Pediatric).</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>C. Assess blood glucose. If glucose &lt; 60 mg/dl, follow protocol M406 / P608.</p>
<p>D. Manage airway as appropriate.</p>
<p>E. Initiate supplemental oxygen by nonrebreather mask to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>F. Place patient on cardiac monitor and obtain diagnostic EKG.</p>
<p>G. Administer IV bolus.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>500 - 1000 ml normal saline IV/IO (Adult).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>20 ml/kg normal saline IV/IO (Pediatric).</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>H. If hypotension or signs of shock persist, follow protocol SB205.</p>
<p>I. Consider antiemetic treatment M405.</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p>J. Notify receiving facility and transport patient.</p>
<p><strong>NOTES:</strong></p>
<p>A. Paramedic administration of the patient’s own injectable steroid (hydrocortisone sodium succinate 100mg IM) is allowed if the patient/family are unable to do so, EMS agency supplied Solu-Medrol (methylprednisolone) is not available, AND the medication is in a factory sealed container (e.g. vial) with valid expiration date.</p>
<p>B. Any patient-supplied medications given by the patient, family, or EMS should be brought to the hospital with the patient.</p>

