---


---

<h1 id="opioid-withdrawal">Opioid Withdrawal</h1>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>I. INCLUSIONCRITERIA</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is 16 years or older</p>
<p>B. Withdrawal from opioids due to the administration of naloxone</p>
<p>C. Withdrawal from opioids due to 24 hours or greater of no use</p>
<p><strong>Opioid Withdrawal Signs/Symptoms:</strong></p>
<ul>
<li>
<p>Yawning</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Rhinorrhea</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Lacrimation</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Dilated Pupils</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Tachycardia</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Diaphoresis</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Restlessness</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Agitation</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Vomiting/Diarrhea</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Piloerection</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Nausea</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Stomach Cramps</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Body Aches</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Bone/Joint Aches</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Hot/Cold Temp.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Nasal Congestion</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p><strong>II. EXCLUSION CRITERIA AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is under 16 years</p>
<p>B. Any methadone uses within 10 days</p>
<p>C. COWS (clinical opioid withdrawal scale) score less than 8</p>
<p>D. Other severe medical illness aside from or in addition to opioid withdrawal</p>
<p>E. Altered mental status or inability to give consent or understand potential risks and benefits</p>
<p><strong>III. PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p>A. If EMS personnel suspect opioid withdrawal either from administration of naloxone or abstinence from opioids, a COWS score should be performed and documented.</p>
<p>B. If COWS score 8 or greater, discuss buprenorphine initiation with patient.</p>
<p>C. If patient consents, administer 16mg of buprenorphine SL and recommend transport to most appropriate facility.</p>
<p>D. If prolonged transport or scene time, reassess patient after 10 minutes following administration of buprenorphine and perform and document an additional COWS score. If still experiencing nausea, see protocol M405 Nausea/Vomiting. If still restless or agitated, see protocol M408 Restraint.</p>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. Buprenorphine can be purchased in multiple formulations, the most common brand names being Suboxone and Subutex. Suboxone includes both buprenorphine and naloxone where-as Subutex is just buprenorphine. Be sure that the initial dose of buprenorphine administered is 16mg regardless of the formulation.</p>
<p>B. If patient refuses transport, every effort should be made to provide the patient with a leave-behind naloxone kit. This should be attempted regardless of whether the patient receives buprenorphine or not.</p>
<p><strong>The PDF version of this protocol includes a graphic-based flowchart of the decision tree on Suboxone administration.  Please refer to the PDF version of the protocol.</strong></p>
<p><strong>The PDF version of this protocol includes a graphic of the COWS scale.  Please refer to the PDF version of the protocol.</strong></p>

