---


---

<h1 id="fever">Fever</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p>A. Inclusion Criteria</p>
<p>A. Age: 6 months and up.</p>
<p>B. Presence of fever is defined as oral, temporal, tympanic or non-contact thermometer reading obtained by EMS of &gt;100.4F.</p>
<p>C. Patient has the ability to swallow liquids.</p>
<p>B. Exclusion Criteria</p>
<p>A. Patient received acetaminophen or acetaminophen-containing products within the last six hours.</p>
<p>B. The patient is allergic to acetaminophen.</p>
<p>C. Protocol</p>
<p>A. Obtain temperature and document method used to obtain temperature.</p>
<p>B. If the patient is febrile, remove excessive blankets and clothing to facilitate passive cooling.</p>
<p>C. If the patient or guardian has provided a room temperature wet washcloth, EMS is permitted to continue its’ use.</p>
<p>D. If the patient is suspected of being septic, refer to M419 Sepsis.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>E. If the patient’s weight is known, utilize that weight for dosing.</p>
<p>F. If the patient’s weight is unknown, utilize length-based tape to determine weight.</p>
<p>G. Dosing questions should be directed to medical control.</p>
<p>H. <strong>PEDIATRIC DOSING</strong> - Administer acetaminophen orally per the dosing chart below.</p>
<p><strong>Pediatric Dosing Chart</strong></p>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Patient Weight (kg)</th>
<th>Children’s Acetaminophen Suspension Liquid (160mg/5mL)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>6-12 lbs. (3-5kg)</td>
<td>1/4 tsp or 1.25mL (40mg)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>13-16 lbs. (6-7kg)</td>
<td>1/2 tsp or 2.5mL (80mg)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>17-25 lbs. (8-11kg)</td>
<td>3/4 tsp or 3.75mL (120mg)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>26-31 lbs. (12-14kg)</td>
<td>1 tsp or 5mL (160mg)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>32-51 lbs. (15-23kg)</td>
<td>1.5 tsp or 7.5mL (240mg)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>52-64 lbs. (24-29kg)</td>
<td>2 tsp or 10mL (320mg)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>65-79 lbs. (30-35kg)</td>
<td>2.5 tsp or 12.5mL (400mg)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>80+ lbs. (36+ kg)</td>
<td>3 tsp or 15mL (480mg)</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table><p>I. <strong>ADULT DOSING</strong> - Adults may be given oral tablet or caplet form.</p>
<ol>
<li>Administer 650-1000mg PO with a sip of water.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="ky-emt">KY-EMT</h2>
<p>J. In Kentucky, EMT’s are permitted to administer acetaminophen. As such, KY EMT’s may administer acetaminophen as shown in the above “Medic” section.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. As a reminder, hyperthermia has causes other than fever. Assess the patient for other factors, such as environmental causes, and treat per relevant protocol.</p>
<p>B. Do not split tablets or caplets to give to children. Only use the liquid formulation as the dosing is more exact.</p>

