---


---

<h1 id="legal-situations-involving-ems">Legal Situations involving EMS</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Introduction</strong></p>
<p>A. The purpose of this protocol is to provide a reference for EMS when dealing with the legal system. This can include but is not limited to suspected abuse or neglect, crime scene management, sexual assault.</p>
<p><strong>II. Suspected Child Abuse</strong></p>
<p>A. In the States of Ohio and Indiana, and in the Commonwealth of Kentucky, healthcare professionals are “mandatory reporters” when dealing with suspected child abuse.</p>
<p>B. Abuse is defined as a victim of sexual activity, is endangered, exhibits evidence of physical or mental injury inflicted other than by accidental means, suffers physical or mental injury because of a guardian’s acts.</p>
<p>C. A form of abuse is neglect. Neglect is defined as: abandoned, lacks adequate parental care, guardian neglects to provide subsistence, education, medical/surgical care, or other necessary care; guardian refuses to provide special care; guardian has attempted to place the child in permanent custody of an institution or foster agency; because of parental neglect suffers physical or mental injury.</p>
<p>D. In cases of suspected abuse, one member of the crew must report the suspected abuse to the proper authorities. This may include local law enforcement, a state department tasked with this responsibility, or to an investigator with Child Protective Services.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Ohio Dept. of Job and Family Services: 855-642-4453</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Kentucky Child/Adult Protective Services: 877-597-2331</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Indiana Child Abuse Hotline: 800-800-5556</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>E. When documenting physical findings, avoid attempting to document the age of the bruising or injury, and what you suspect caused the injury. Document objectively what you find. You are not required to perform an investigative exam with measurements and photographs.</p>
<p>F. The EMS crew must report their suspicions of abuse to either the nurse or physician assuming care of the patient in the Emergency Department.</p>
<p>G. Investigators may request additional information following a verbal report. These disclosures are expressly permitted by HIPAA.</p>
<p>H. Information that you may be asked to provide include:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>The name and address of the child</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Age</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Name and address of the guardian</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Name of the person(s) you suspect are abusing or neglecting the child.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The reason you suspect the child is being abused or neglected.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Any other information you believe may be helpful to the investigation.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>I. If you have suspicion of child abuse, you believe the patient needs medical care, and the guardian is refusing transport, get local police involved immediately. Medical control can also be engaged to help with decision making.</p>
<p><strong>III. Elder Abuse</strong></p>
<p>A. The States of Ohio and Indiana, and the Commonwealth of Kentucky made all firefighters and EMS professionals “mandatory reporters” of suspected elder abuse or neglect.</p>
<p>B. Elder abuse refers to any knowing, intentional, or negligent act by a caregiver or any other person that causes harm or a serious risk of harm to a vulnerable adult.</p>
<p>C. <strong>Neglect or isolation occurs when someone’s basic needs are not being med, putting them at higher risk for getting sick or hurt. Neglect can result from the patients’ own wishes, or the inaction of another.</strong></p>
<p>D. <strong>Financial abuse and exploitation occur when one person uses another person’s money, information, or belongings for their own personal benefit.</strong></p>
<p>E. In cases of suspected abuse, exploitation, or neglect, one member of the crew must report the suspected abuse to the proper authorities. This may include local law enforcement, a state department tasked with this responsibility, or to an investigator with Adult Protective Services.</p>
<p>F. The following numbers are for reference but are not for emergency requests. These should still be made with local law enforcement.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Ohio Dept. of Job and Family Services: 855-644-6277</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Kentucky Child/Adult Protective Services: 877-597-2331</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Indiana Child Abuse Hotline: 800-992-6978</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>G. When documenting physical findings, avoid attempting to document the age of the bruising or injury, and what you suspect caused the injury. Document objectively what you find. You are not required to perform an investigative exam with measurements and photographs.</p>
<p>H. The EMS crew must report their suspicions of abuse to either the nurse or physician assuming care of the patient in the Emergency Department.</p>
<p>I. Investigators may request additional information following a verbal report. These disclosures are expressly permitted by HIPAA.</p>
<p>J. Information that you may be asked to provide include:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>The name and address of the person</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Name and address of the person responsible for the victim’s care</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Name of the person(s) you suspect are abusing or neglecting the elder</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The reason you suspect the elder is being abused, exploited, or neglected.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Any other information you believe may be helpful to the investigation.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>K. If you have suspicion of elder abuse, you believe the patient needs medical care, and a guardian is refusing transport, get local police involved immediately. Medical control can also be engaged to help with decision making.</p>
<p><strong>IV. Crime Scene Management</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient care is prioritized over evidence preservation. However, every attempt should be made to preserve evidence when doing so does not interfere with patient care.</p>
<p>B. Only enter and exit through one location, trying to keep footsteps within one path.</p>
<p>C. Do not walk in fluids present on scene when able.</p>
<p>D. If you must move something (furniture, personal effects), note its location prior to movement.</p>
<p>E. Avoid touching anything without gloves. Minimize surfaces touched.</p>
<p>F. Leave the victim undisturbed as able if attempting to determine death.</p>
<p>G. If clothing must be cut, avoid cutting through any holes, slits, or other damage/contamination to the clothing. Cut along seams if possible.</p>
<p>H. Any removed clothing should be placed into a paper grocery type bag, or onto a clean sheet and presented to law enforcement when able. If unable to hand over to law enforcement, sign the clothing over to the ED RN or hospital security. Note the time and person you handed it over to.</p>
<p>I. Avoid cleaning skin except as needed for patient care.</p>
<p>J. Do not remove garbage generated on scene or attempt to clean the scene in any way. Sharps generated as part of patient care should be placed into a sharps container.</p>
<p><strong>V. Suspected Sexual Assault</strong></p>
<p>A. Medical or trauma complaints take priority over destination or care modification as below.</p>
<p>B. Pediatric victims of suspected sexual assault should preferentially be transported to Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Main Campus.</p>
<p>C. Adult victims of suspected sexual assault should be taken to an emergency department. All local emergency departments have Sexual Assault Nurse Examiners on-call.</p>
<p>D. Have the patient remain in their current clothing. If the patient has changed since the assault, have the patient bring the prior clothes.</p>
<p>E. Avoid letting the patient use the restroom, wash anything, eat, drink, use chewing gum, brush teeth, or use mouthwash as these actions may contaminate or wash away evidence.</p>
<p>F. Avoid performing any medical treatment, including invasive procedures (such as FSBG, IV access) unless necessary. Avoid contact with the patient to avoid disturbing possible evidence. You may take vital signs but note which arm you performed a BP and which finger for pulse ox.</p>
<p>G. Avoid going into detail about the assault. This will be done by the SANE nurse and law enforcement. The patient may omit important information if they tell the story repeatedly. Always document patient statements in quotation marks.</p>
<p>H. Drug-facilitated sexual assault may occur. Refer to M411 Toxicological Emergencies if needed.</p>
<p>I. Patients have the right to receive a medical screening examination, prophylaxis for sexually transmitted diseases and pregnancy, and medical evidence collection without filing a police report. Criminal investigations are separate from this process in adults.</p>
<h2 id="ky-all">KY-ALL</h2>
<p><strong>VI. Safe Infants Act – Safe Infants Protocol for Prehospital Providers</strong></p>
<p>A. Any parent or person acting on behalf of the parent may come to a police station, firehouse, EMS station, or hospital unannounced and leave a newborn infant. When this event occurs, the police officer, firefighter, EMS worker, or hospital worker SHALL accept the infant. This situation must meet the following criteria.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>The newborn infant must be medically determined to be less than 72 hours old.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The newborn infant cannot have indicators of child abuse, maltreatment, or neglect after birth.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Perform a primary and secondary survey of the infant and initiate any necessary procedure to protect the health and safety. Keep the newborn warm especially the head.</p>
<p>C. Consider rapid glucose determination.</p>
<p>D. Kentucky law requires that any care provider who suspects child abuse, neglect, or maltreatment SHALL report it. You should call the Department for Community Based Services (DCBS) hotline at 1-800- 752-6200 to make your report. You have no authority to detain, follow or pursue the parent.</p>
<p>E. Summon EMS for transport of the infant.</p>
<p>F. Notify your supervisor and follow any policies and procedures your agency has implemented.</p>
<p>G. Retrieve and open an "Abandoned Infant” packet. Complete the enclosed checklist.</p>
<p>H. Place the numbered band around the ankle of the infant.</p>
<p>I. Ensure that the bands stub remains attached to the Medical Information Form and copy the stub number directly onto the Medical Information Form.</p>
<p>J. You will offer the parent information regarding medical needs of the mother who is post-partum rights, and services available to the parent, which have been provided in the packet.</p>
<p>K. Newborn infants should be transported in an age appropriate car seat if available. Otherwise, newborns should be transported using appropriate immobilization measures.</p>
<p>L. Newborn infants may be fed with SIMILAC or ENFAMIL if a lengthy transport time is anticipated. Newborns normally eat 2-2.5 ounces of formula at feeding. Feeding is not advised for any infant that is experiencing any respiratory or circulatory abnormality.</p>
<p>M. KRS211.951, 2216B.190, 311.6526, 405.075 and 620.355 is known as the Thomas J. Burch Safe Infants Act. The law provides a safe place for unwanted newborn babies. Parents may now leave an unwanted infant with any Kentucky EMS provider, police station, fire station or hospital without consequence. I hope that preventing any unwanted newborn from being left in a dangerous or deadly environment.</p>
<p>Provide the mother with the “How to Keep Yourself Healthy” brochure found at: <a href="https://www.chfs.ky.gov/agencies/dcbs/dpp/cpb/Documents/Safeinfantkeephelathy210.pdf">https://www.chfs.ky.gov/agencies/dcbs/dpp/cpb/Documents/Safeinfantkeephelathy210.pdf</a> and the “A Safe Place for your Baby” brochure found at: <a href="https://chfs.ky.gov/agencies/dcbs/dpp/cpb/Documents/Safeinfantsafeplace210.pdf">https://chfs.ky.gov/agencies/dcbs/dpp/cpb/Documents/Safeinfantsafeplace210.pdf</a></p>

