---


---

<h1 id="imminent-delivery">Imminent Delivery</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Pregnant woman who is in active labor as defined by regular, frequent, painful uterine contractions and who feels the urge to push.</p>
<p>B. Presence of fetal part at vaginal opening.</p>
<p><strong>II. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. If patient is in labor but not showing signs of imminent delivery transport rapidly to hospital with maternity services, preferably the hospital associated with the patient’s obstetrician. If you arrive on scene and delivery is imminent, deliver on scene prior to transport.</p>
<p>B. Call for additional manpower if needed.</p>
<p>C. Obtain brief obstetrical history.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Estimated Due Date (EDD)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Gestational Age</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. <strong>Less than 22 weeks is a non-viable baby.</strong></p>
<p>i. Babies delivering earlier than 22 weeks do not benefit from transport to a Level 3 NICU.</p>
<p>b. <strong>22 0/7 weeks to 24 6/7 weeks is a peri-viable baby</strong></p>
<p>i. Periviability, in the context of pregnancy, refers to the period of fetal development where there is a chance of survival outside the uterus, though not necessarily a high one. It’s a critical time because infants born during this period are at significant risk of death or long-term health complications.</p>
<p>ii. Management of peri-viable births involves careful consideration of both medical and ethical factors, including the wishes of the parents and the infant’s prognosis.</p>
<p>iii. These patients benefit from transport to a hospital with a Level 3 NICU.</p>
<p>c. <strong>25 weeks and greater is a viable baby.</strong></p>
<p>d. <strong>25 - 31 6/7 weeks is a severely premature baby.</strong></p>
<p>i. These babies do best if they are delivered at a hospital that has a Level 3 NICU.</p>
<p>e. <strong>32 – 36 6/7 weeks is a premature baby (can deliver at any hospital with obstetric services).</strong></p>
<p>f. <strong>37 weeks and greater is a term baby</strong> (can deliver at any hospital with obstetric services).</p>
<ol start="4">
<li>
<p>Gravidity – number of pregnancies.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Parity – number of deliveries after the 20th week of pregnancy.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Complications during this or previous pregnancies or anticipated problems with delivery such as pre-eclampsia, gestational diabetes, drug use, twins or higher order multiples, etc.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Prepare providers for delivery, neonatal care, and maternal care.</p>
<p>E. Call for additional support as needed (maternal care team, fetal care team)</p>
<p>F. Wear personal protective equipment (PPE).</p>
<p>G. Maintain patient privacy, when feasible.</p>
<p>H. If time permits, establish IV access.</p>
<p>I. Assist with <strong>Normal Spontaneous Vaginal Delivery – Head is the presenting part:</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>As the baby crowns, support the head and the perineum with gentle pressure to control the emergence of the head and minimize perineal trauma.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If amniotic membrane is still intact as the head is crowning, rupture with your fingers, forceps, or clamp to allow amniotic fluid to leak out, note the color and viscosity of the fluid. If, after rupturing the fetal membranes, the fetal membranes are covering the head and face at the time of delivery wipe them away with a clean towel.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>After delivery of the head, check for the presence of the umbilical cord around the baby’s neck. If cord is around the neck, attempt to slip it over the head. Alternatively, it may be possible to slip it back over the shoulders and deliver the body through the loop. The cord should only be clamped and cut to relieve a nuchal cord as a last resort.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If the cord is too tight to slip over the head or around the shoulders during delivery, apply 2 umbilical cord clamps 1 inch (2.5cm) apart and cut between them.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Instruct the mother to push and support the baby’s head as it rotates.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>After the head rotates to face the mother’s thigh, guide the head and neck downward to encourage the top (anterior) shoulder to deliver.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>When you can see the baby’s top shoulder deliver, guide the head and neck upward to deliver the bottom (posterior) shoulder. The rest of the baby should follow quickly.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If the infant is vigorous, delay clamping of the umbilical cord for 30-60 seconds. This helps to prevent neonatal anemia, but resuscitation takes priority if the infant has respiratory or circulatory depression.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Clamp the umbilical cord by placing the first clamp approximately 4 inches (10 cm) from the baby. Place the second clamp approximately 2 inches (5 cm) further from the baby (closer to the mother) than the first clamp, cut the umbilical cord between the clamps.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Hand the infant to a second provider to establish neonatal care if needed. If the infant is stable, breathing and has good tone, place the infant on the mother’s chest, skin to skin for transport.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p><strong>KEEP INFANT WARM</strong></p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If a neonatal restraint is available, transport newborn in the restraint device according to manufacturer’s recommendations.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>• SAPLACOR AEGIS 4–14 lb. (1.18–6.35 kg) No Cot, on adult, Single Use</p>
<p>• Ferno KangooFix Neonatal Restraint System 3.5–11 lb. (1.6–4.98 kg) No Cot, on adult, Machine Washable</p>
<ol start="13">
<li><strong>ALWAYS NOTIFY RECEIVING HOSPITAL.</strong></li>
</ol>
<p>L. Assist with delivery of the placenta.</p>
<ol>
<li>Recognize signs of placental separation</li>
</ol>
<p>a. The uterus may become more firm and rise in the abdomen. A gush of blood and lengthening of the umbilical cord can also indicate separation.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>
<p>DO NOT pull on the umbilical cord to facilitate delivery of the placenta.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>DO NOT delay transport waiting for the placenta to deliver.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If the placenta delivers spontaneously, place in a plastic bag and transport to the hospital with the mother and the infant.</p>
</li>
</ol>

