---


---

<h1 id="delivery-complications">Delivery Complications</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p>I. <strong>Mal-Presentation:</strong></p>
<p>A. Malpresentation refers to a situation during pregnancy where the baby is not positioned head-down (vertex) in the uterus, which is the optimal position for vaginal delivery. Instead, other parts of the baby, like the buttocks, feet, shoulder, or even face, may be positioned to enter the birth canal first. This can lead to complications during labor and delivery.</p>
<p>B. Elevate the hips of the mother and transport immediately.</p>
<p>II. <strong>Breech Presentation:</strong> - Buttocks or feet are presenting and <strong>delivery is imminent</strong></p>
<p>A. Buttocks is presenting</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Support the baby as it delivers.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>“Breakdown” the legs (insert finger into the patellar fossa/behind knees and flex knees and hips one at a time.)</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Feet are presenting</p>
<p>C. Support the baby as it delivers.</p>
<p>D. After the legs and buttocks have delivered, support the baby wrapped in a towel as a sling until the arms and shoulders are visible.</p>
<p>E. “Breakdown” the arms (insert finger into the cubital fossa (in front of the elbow) and flex arms one at a time).</p>
<p>F. After the shoulders have delivered, gently elevate trunk and legs to aid in delivery of head (if face down).</p>
<p>G. Head should deliver in 30 seconds. If not, reach 2 fingers into the vagina to locate infant’s mouth. Press vaginal wall away from baby’s mouth to access an airway.</p>
<p>H. Apply gentle pressure to mother’s fundus.</p>
<ol>
<li><strong>Mauriceau–Smellie–Veit</strong> maneuver is an emergent medical maneuver utilized in cases of breech delivery. This procedure entails suprapubic pressure by one provider on the mother/uterus, while another provider inserts left hand in vagina, palpating the fetal maxilla using the index and middle finger and gently pressing on the maxilla, bringing the neck to a moderate flexion. The left hand’s palm should rest against the fetus’ chest, while the right hand can grab either shoulder of the fetus and pull in the direction of the fetus’ pelvis. The combined neck flexion, traction on the fetus toward the hip/pelvis, and the suprapubic pressure on the mother/uterus allows for delivery of the head of a breech infant, granted prior breech delivery steps are followed and the infant’s occiput is rotated/facing anteriorly relative to the mother (i.e., baby is facing downward).</li>
</ol>
<p>I. After complete delivery, provide routine newborn care with special attention to maintenance of infant body temperature. Place infant on oxygen and suction if needed. Refer to P600 Pediatric Newborn Resuscitation if needed.</p>
<p><strong>III. Prolapsed Cord:</strong></p>
<p>a. Relieve pressure on the cord. This can be accomplished by placing a gloved hand in the vagina and lifting the presenting fetal part off of the cord and cervix.</p>
<p>b. Elevate hips of mother.</p>
<p>c. Keep cord moist.</p>
<p>d. Apply high flow oxygen to mother and transport.</p>
<p><strong>IV. Shoulder Dystocia - when the head delivers, and shoulders fail to deliver.</strong></p>
<p>A. Hyperflex mother’s hips to knee to chest position while lying supine (McRoberts Maneuver).</p>
<p>B. Apply firm suprapubic (NOT FUNDAL) pressure to attempt to dislodge the anterior shoulder.</p>
<p>C. If the anterior shoulder is not deliverable attempt to deliver the posterior shoulder using the shoulder shrug maneuver</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>A pincer grip is used to grasp the posterior shoulder in the axilla (armpit).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The shoulder is gently pulled upward and toward the vaginal opening, essentially shrugging it.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The head and the retracted shoulder are then rotated 180 degrees, turning the anterior shoulder (the one initially stuck) into a posterior position, allowing it to be delivered more easily.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Apply high flow oxygen and transport to closest available receiving facility if these maneuvers do not work. <strong>NEVER</strong> pull on the head in an attempt to extract the baby.</p>
<p><strong>V.</strong> After complete delivery, provide routine newborn care with special attention to maintenance of infant body temperature. Place infant on oxygen and suction if needed. Refer to P600 Pediatric Newborn Resuscitation if needed.</p>
<p><strong>VI. Post-Partum Hemorrhage:</strong> Post-Partum Hemorrhage is blood loss &gt;500 ml following a vaginal delivery. If present:</p>
<p>A. Obtain assistance.</p>
<p>B. Continue to monitor vital signs and blood loss.</p>
<p>C. Examine and apply pressure to any active bleeding sites.</p>
<p>D. Rapidly assess uterine tone.</p>
<p>E. Aggressively massage uterine fundus.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>F. Establish adequate IV access (adequate intravenous access would ideally be provided with two lines, at least one of which is a larger bore catheter).</p>
<p>G. Resuscitate with crystalloid.</p>
<p>H. Administer <strong>tranexamic acid (TXA)</strong> per protocol S506.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>I. Massage should be maintained while other interventions are being initiated and continued until the uterus remains firm and bleeding has abated. If the fundus is well contracted but bleeding continues unabated, then further massage is not likely to be effective and progression to other methods of hemorrhage control should occur promptly.</p>
<p>J. Rapidly transport the patient to the hospital.</p>
<p><strong>VII. Transportation Considerations:</strong></p>
<p>A. If the mother or infant have any evidence of hemodynamic instability and/or if the delivery is difficult, call for immediate ALS backup.</p>
<p>B. Resume transport of mother and baby to hospital with 24/7 labor and delivery service.</p>
<p>C. If a complication such as massive bleeding or neonatal distress occurs, proceed to nearest appropriate hospital.</p>
<p>D. ALWAYS NOTIFY RECEIVING HOSPITAL</p>
<p><strong>VIII. Destination Considerations:</strong></p>
<p>A. Every effort should be made to transport the mother and the baby to the same hospital.</p>
<p>B. Every effort should be made to keep the mother and the baby together (same transport unit).</p>
<p>C. Kangaroo Care, or skin to skin contact (SSC) between mother and newborn immediately following birth has been shown to be beneficial in assisting newborn transition to extrauterine life and promoting maternal-infant attachment.</p>
<p>D. There are no federal or industry consensus standards in the US for devices used to secure children in ambulances. Each manufacturer determines if/how it will test a device.</p>
<p>E. Each department should develop a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) to define best practices for transport of the newborn following delivery outside the hospital. The SOP should consider each department’s available resources.</p>
<p>F. On scene time – consider waiting up to 20 minutes before initiating transport if mother and newborn are stable.</p>
<p>G. Consider use of a neonatal transport system:</p>
<p>o SAPLACOR AEGIS 4–14 lb. (1.18–6.35 kg) No Cot, on adult, Single Use</p>
<p>o Ferno KangooFix Neonatal Restraint System 3.5–11 lb. (1.6–4.98 kg) No Cot, on adult, Machine Washable</p>
<p>IX. NOTES:</p>
<p>A. Under most circumstances it is preferable that the patient be transported to the hospital where she was planning to deliver.</p>
<p>B. Women that are believed to be 22- 31 6/7 weeks pregnant (peri-viable and severely premature) should preferentially be transported to a hospital with a Level 3 NICU.</p>
<p>C. Hospitals with Labor and Delivery and a Level 3 NICU in Hamilton County:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>University of Cincinnati Medical Center</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Good Samaritan Hospital</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Pregnant teenagers being transported to the hospital for any issues related to the pregnancy (i.e., vaginal bleeding, imminent delivery, abdominal pain, elevated blood pressure, seizure, etc.) should be taken to a hospital with 24/7 labor and delivery service.</p>
<ol>
<li>FYI - Bethesda North Hospital does not admit/keep patients less than 16 years old after they have been evaluated and stabilized.</li>
</ol>
<p>E. If uncertain where patient should be taken - contact medical control.</p>
<p>F. The <em>Committee on Obstetric Practice</em> agrees with the recommendation of the <em>American Academy of Pediatrics</em> and the <em>American Heart Association</em> that all infants with meconium-stained amniotic fluid should no longer routinely receive intrapartum suctioning:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>If the newborn is vigorous, defined as having strong respiratory efforts, good muscle tone, and a heart rate greater than 100 beats per minute, there is no evidence that tracheal suctioning is necessary. Injury to the vocal cords is more likely to occur when attempting to intubate a vigorous newborn.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If meconium is present and the newborn is depressed, refer to P600 Pediatric Newborn Resuscitation.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>G. Given the benefits to most newborns and concordant with other professional organizations, the <em>American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists</em> now recommends a delay in umbilical cord clamping in vigorous term and preterm infants for at least 30-60 seconds after birth.</p>

