---


---

<h1 id="pregnancy---complications-and-postpartum-care">Pregnancy - Complications and Postpartum Care</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. INCLUSION CRITERIA</strong></p>
<p><strong>A.</strong> <strong>Seizure</strong> in pregnant females of any gestational age <strong>OR</strong></p>
<p><strong>B.</strong> <strong>Vaginal bleeding</strong> in pregnancy and postpartum hemorrhage <strong>OR</strong></p>
<p><strong>C.</strong> <strong>Hypertensive Crisis</strong> in pregnancy</p>
<p>**Note: for all pregnant patients - Postpartum is defined as <em>delivery to one year</em> post-delivery.</p>
<p><strong>II. PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p><strong>A. Seizure – Eclampsia:</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Eclampsia is a clinical diagnosis based on the occurrence of new-onset tonic-clonic, focal, or multifocal seizures in a pregnant or recent postpartum patient, in the absence of other causative conditions (e.g., epilepsy, cerebral arterial ischemia and infarction, intracranial hemorrhage, drug use).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Most women have signs/symptoms in the hours before their initial seizure, such as hypertension, headache, visual disturbances, and/or right upper quadrant or epigastric pain. Patients with these symptoms should be transported to a hospital with 24/7 obstetric services.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Eclampsia can occur at any time during the pregnancy. Approximately 90 % of postpartum seizures occur within one week of delivery.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Eclampsia can also occur up to 6 weeks after delivery. If seizing, these patients should be treated as eclampsia.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Key management issues are:</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Prevention of maternal hypoxia and trauma</p>
<p>b. Treatment of severe hypertension (if present)</p>
<p>c. Prevention of recurrent seizures with magnesium sulfate</p>
<p>d. Rapid transport to an appropriate hospital with maternity services.</p>
<ol start="6">
<li>If the patient is actively seizing, treat and or prevent hypoxia, trauma, and recurrent seizures as per the general seizure protocol - M410.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<ol start="7">
<li>IV access should be obtained as soon as possible.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<ol start="8">
<li>If the patent is pregnant place in or maintain a left lateral tilt.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<ol start="9">
<li>
<p>If actively seizing, give Versed (midazolam) first line as per the general seizure protocol - M410.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For women with eclampsia, administer magnesium sulfate even if the patient is no longer seizing.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. We suggest using an intravascular magnesium sulfate regimen rather than an intramuscular regimen or IO regimen when IV access is available.</p>
<p>• Administer a 4-6-gram loading dose over 20 to 25 minutes.</p>
<p>b. One method of diluting Magnesium Sulfate is to mix 4-6 grams in 100 ml of normal saline and run in over 20-25 minutes.</p>
<p>c. Alternatively give 10g deep IM “Z track” in 2 divided 5g injections with a 3” needle in each buttock. Gently massage the site after administration.</p>
<p>d. Be cautious of hypotension caused by Magnesium Sulfate.</p>
<ol start="11">
<li>
<p>Magnesium Sulfate is contraindicated in a patient with a known history of myasthenia gravis.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Beware the combination of Versed and Magnesium Sulfate can lead to severe respiratory depression.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The threshold for initiating anti-hypertensive therapy is sustained systolic BP 160 and/or diastolic BP 110 on two occasions at least 15 minutes apart.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>B. Vaginal bleeding in pregnancy and postpartum hemorrhage:</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Vaginal bleeding can signal serious complications at any point in pregnancy, including in women that do not yet know that they are pregnant.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>A pregnancy related complication should be considered in any patient complaining of vaginal bleeding (or pelvic/abdominal pain) from early teens until mid-to-late 50s.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The causes of bleeding in pregnancy vary depending on gestational age:</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. <strong>First trimester</strong> (conception to 12 weeks gestation):</p>
<p>i. Vaginal bleeding occurs in up to 40% of pregnant women in the first trimester, many go on to have normal pregnancies.</p>
<p>ii. Causes of vaginal bleeding in early pregnancy include miscarriage and ectopic pregnancy. These can occur before a woman knows that she is pregnant.</p>
<p>b. <strong>Second and third trimester</strong> causes of bleeding include:</p>
<p>i. <strong>Placenta previa</strong> - this is where the placenta is positioned partially or totally over the cervix. This condition can lead to significant blood loss <strong>and can become life threatening</strong>. This is often described as “painless bleeding.”</p>
<p>ii. <strong>Placental abruption</strong> - this is where the placenta prematurely detaches from the uterine wall**; this can be life threatening for the mother and the fetus**.</p>
<p>iii. Anything that elevates blood pressure, including chronic hypertension, gestational hypertension (pre-eclampsia/eclampsia) and use of drugs such as cocaine, increases the risk of developing this condition. This is often described as “painful bleeding.”</p>
<p>iv. <strong>Trauma is a leading cause of placental abruption.</strong> Placental abruption can occur without evidence visible bleeding (occult abruption).</p>
<p>c. <strong>Post-partum hemorrhage</strong> can occur up to 12 weeks following delivery, but the vast majority occurs in the minutes following delivery and management is covered in detail in the imminent delivery protocol.</p>
<ol start="4">
<li>Assessment</li>
</ol>
<p>a. History</p>
<p>b. Physical exam</p>
<ol start="5">
<li>Treatment</li>
</ol>
<p>a. The hallmark of treating bleeding during pregnancy is support, resuscitation, and transport.</p>
<p>b. If the patient has passed products of conception, place this into a plastic bag and transport with the patient. Laboratory testing will often be performed on this tissue.</p>
<p>c. If the patient elects to transport themselves, encourage them to place the tissue in a plastic bag and contact their OB/GYN or primary care provider.</p>
<h2 id="medic-2">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>C. Hypertensive Crisis in Pregnancy:</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>The threshold for initiating antihypertensive therapy is sustained systolic BP 160 and/or diastolic BP 110 on two occasions at least 15 minutes apart.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Place the patient on continuous cardiac monitoring and pulse oximetry.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Attempt to establish IV access, but do not delay medication administration because of lack of IV access.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Administer nifedipine 10mg by mouth. Repeat blood pressure in 15 minutes. If there is persistent severe range blood pressures repeat nifedipine 10 mg by mouth to a maximum of three doses.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Notify the receiving hospital that the patient met the criteria for <em>Hypertensive Crisis in Pregnancy</em> and that treatment has been initiated with nifedipine.</p>
</li>
</ol>

