---


---

<h1 id="pregnancy---trauma-guidelines">Pregnancy - Trauma Guidelines</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. INCLUSION CRITERIA</strong></p>
<p>A. Trauma in pregnant females of any gestational age OR</p>
<p><strong>II. PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p>A. <strong>Trauma -</strong> This section serves to supplement the current trauma guidelines with some caveats and specific recommendations for pregnant patients.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>The best initial treatment of the fetus is the provision of optimal resuscitation of the mother.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Because of their increased intravascular volume, pregnant patients can lose a significant amount of blood before tachycardia, hypotension, or other signs of shock or hypovolemia appear.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The highest incidence of fetal death occurs secondary to severe maternal shock, which is associated with a fetal mortality rate of 80%.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The fetus may be in distress and the placenta deprived of vital perfusion while the mother’s condition and vital signs appear stable.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Oxygen supplementation should be given via non-rebreather mask to maintain maternal oxygen saturation &gt;95% to ensure adequate fetal oxygenation.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Because of their adverse effect on utero-placental perfusion, vasopressors in pregnant women should be used only for intractable hypotension that is unresponsive to fluid resuscitation.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>After mid-pregnancy, the gravid uterus should be moved off the inferior vena cava to increase venous return and cardiac output in the acutely injured pregnant woman. This may be achieved by manual displacement of the uterus or left lateral tilt (30 degrees). Care should be taken to secure the spinal cord when using left lateral tilt if spinal motion restriction is indicated. In the case of maternal cardiac arrest, CPR must be performed in this position. Laying the patient flat significantly inhibits venous return.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Fetal loss can occur even when the mother has incurred no abdominal injuries.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Severe injuries are much more likely to result in fetal loss. However, there is a much higher frequency of minor trauma during pregnancy and thus most fetal losses due to trauma are due to minor maternal mechanism of injury.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<ol start="10">
<li>
<p>Intubation is more difficult with failed intubations 8x more likely. A smaller size ET tube is recommended.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Insertion of 2 large bore IV’s is recommended for all seriously injured pregnant trauma patients to facilitate initial rapid crystalloid infusion, intravascular volume expansion, and possible blood transfusion as required.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<ol start="12">
<li>
<p>Avoid the urge to focus on the fetus; babies do not do well if mothers do not do well.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Every pregnant woman who sustains trauma should be asked questions specifically about domestic or intimate partner violence.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Call medical control for questions. Notify receiving hospital in all cases of pregnant trauma patient. Patient should be transported to a trauma center with labor and delivery services available.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>All pregnant trauma patients past the age of viability (&gt;/= 23 weeks) should be monitored on an obstetrical unit for signs of increased uterine activity which could indicate placental injury (placental abruption). If the patient refuses transport by EMS, they should be encouraged to contact their obstetric provider as soon as possible.</p>
</li>
</ol>

