---


---

<h1 id="pregnancy---cardiac-arrest">Pregnancy - Cardiac Arrest</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. INCLUSION CRITERIA</strong></p>
<p>A. Cardiac arrest in a pregnant female</p>
<p>B. <strong>Notes for all pregnant patients</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>Post-Partum is defined as delivery to one year post-delivery.</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>II. PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p>A. <strong>General Approach -</strong> This section serves to supplement the current cardiac arrest guidelines with some caveats and specific recommendations for pregnant patients.</p>
<ol>
<li>The best initial treatment of the fetus is the provision of optimal resuscitation of the mother.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<ol start="2">
<li>Intubation is more difficult with failed intubations 8x more likely. A smaller size ET tube is recommended.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<ol start="3">
<li>
<p>Avoid the urge to focus on the fetus; babies do not do well if mothers do not do well.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Call medical control for questions. Notify receiving hospital in all cases of pregnant cardiac arrest.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<ol start="5">
<li>IV/IO access should be obtained as soon as possible.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p>B. <strong>Cardiac Arrest</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>All pregnant patients greater than 24 weeks (or a fundal height palpated at or above the level of the umbilicus) in cardiac arrest should be transported as soon as possible to the nearest emergency department for a resuscitative hysterotomy (also known as a peri-mortem cesarean section). [Also See Protocol S509 Traumatic Cardiac Arrest (Adults &amp; Pediatrics) III. A. 2.]</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Management of the pregnant cardiac arrest patient is similar to the non-pregnant patient; this includes high-quality chest compressions with minimally interrupted CPR, administration of ACLS medications, and defibrillation. Please refer to Protocol SB204 – Cardiac Arrest.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If not limited due to body habitus and/or a gravid uterus, chest compressions can be performed with a mechanical device (ie LUCAS®).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>When performing chest compressions, apply manual left uterine displacement to relieve pressure off the inferior vena cava to allow blood flow back to the heart. This can be performed via a one-handed or two-handed technique:</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. One-handed technique (A): With patient flat on her back and the provider standing on the woman’s right side, the provider pushes the women’s uterus away (toward the patient’s left side)</p>
<p>b. Two-handed technique (B): With the patient on her back, the provider standing on the woman’s left side, the provider uses two hands to pull the women’s uterus towards (toward the patient’s left side)</p>
<ol start="5">
<li>Airway management in the pregnant patient can be difficult, and strong consideration should be for the placement for supraglottic device to reduce the risk of hypoxia to mother and fetus.</li>
</ol>

