---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-newborn-resuscitation">Pediatric Newborn Resuscitation</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Newborn infant.</p>
<p>B. Not crying, poor or no respiratory effort, and limp muscle tone.</p>
<p><strong>II. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Ensure adequate airway. Suction mouth, oropharynx, and then nose.</p>
<p>B. Dry infant to provide stimulation and prevent chilling. Keep the infant warm, especially the head.</p>
<p>C. Check heart rate by palpating the umbilical cord or listening to the heart with a stethoscope. If less than 100, bag-valve-mask (BVM) with <strong>ROOM AIR</strong> at a rate of 60 per minute. If heart rate is less than 60 beats/min, despite 30 seconds of adequate BVM ventilation, begin chest compressions using the 2 thumb-encircling hands technique at a ratio of 3:1 with breaths.</p>
<p>D. Consider use of a pulse-oximeter, with the probe attached to the right upper extremity (if possible), to assess any need for supplementary oxygen.</p>
<p>E. Once positive-pressure ventilation or supplementary oxygen administration is begun, reassessment should consist of simultaneous evaluation of 3 clinical characteristics: heart rate, respiratory rate, and evaluation of the state of oxygenation (optimally determined by pulse oximetry rather than assessment of color). If heart rate remains less than 100 after 30 seconds of BVM ventilation, request ALS back-up.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>F. If heart rate remains less than 100 after 30 seconds of BVM ventilation, reassess airway and consider intubation per T705.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>FULL TERM: 3.0 - 3.5 ET tube</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>PREMATURE: 2.5 - 3.0 ET tube</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>G. Assess response to intubation, again using the 3 clinical characteristics. Check the position of the endotracheal tube using an exhaled CO2 detector and document the centimeter mark at the gum line. If heart rate less than 60, initiate cardiac compressions (1/2 – 1-inch depth) at 120 per minute. In the newborn, a chest compression to ventilation ratio of 3:1 is used. It is important that you use only enough bag pressure to move the chest. This limits the chance for pneumothorax.</p>
<p>H. If heart rate is still less than 60 after 30 seconds of chest compressions and adequate assisted ventilation, consider epinephrine 0.04 mg of 0.1 mg/mL (0.4 mL IV/IO, 0.2 mL for preterm newborn). If vascular access is not available, then give epinephrine 0.1mg/kg (0.1 mg/mL at 0.1mL/kg mL via ETT, roughly 1mL for full-term newborn, 0.5mL for pre-term). Repeat epinephrine every 3 to 5 minutes until heart rate is greater than or equal to 60.</p>
<p>I. If hypovolemia is suspected due to blood loss at delivery, then give normal saline 20 mL/kg (roughly 40 mL IV: 20 mL for preterm newborn).</p>
<p>J. Provide medical control with patient update.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. Every effort should be made to transport both the mother and infant to the same hospital.</p>
<p>B. Resuscitations on newborns should begin with a BVM without supplemental oxygen. Even healthy newborns that do not require resuscitation can take more than 10 minutes to reach SpO2 of greater than 90%. Using supplemental oxygen for newborns requiring resuscitation may worsen their neurological outcomes because of injury due to oxygen free radicals.</p>
<p>C. Newborns lose heat rapidly and need to be kept warm to decrease oxygen demands and prevent metabolic acidosis.</p>
<p>D. When dealing with such a short trachea, remember that slippage of even a centimeter in endotracheal tube position can result in inadvertent extubation. Reassess the airway frequently.</p>
<p>E. Intubation and suctioning are reserved for newborns with thick meconium who are NON-VIGOROUS (poor respiratory effort, decreased muscle tone, AND heart rate less than 100).</p>
<p>F. It is important that you inform medical control of the length of your resuscitation since the new AHA guidelines (Dec. 2010) support the PHYSICIAN discontinuation of resuscitation for newborns born without a heartbeat and respirations after 10 minutes.</p>
<p>G. Decisions about resuscitating newborns with stigmata of extreme prematurity (i.e., very small, fused eyelids, gelatinous skin, etc.) should involve online medical control.</p>
<p>H. Term infants who have undergone prolonged resuscitation should not be actively warmed in the prehospital setting.</p>

