---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-cardiac-arrest---ventricular-fibrillation--pulseless-ventricular-tachycardia-vfpvt">Pediatric Cardiac Arrest - Ventricular Fibrillation / Pulseless Ventricular Tachycardia (VF/pVT)</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. INCLUSION CRITERIA</strong></p>
<p>A. Age is younger than 16 years.</p>
<p>B. Patient is unconscious.</p>
<p>C. Patient is apneic.</p>
<p>D. Patient has no pulses.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>II. EKG FINDINGS</strong></p>
<p>A. Ventricular fibrillation, or</p>
<p>B. Ventricular tachycardia without a pulse.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>III. PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p>A. Continue CPR and care per SB204.</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>B. If rhythm is ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia without a pulse, defibrillate immediately at 2 joules/kg (not to exceed the adult dose).</p>
<p>C. Perform CPR for 2 minutes before another pulse or rhythm check is done.</p>
<p>D. Defibrillation energy sequence should continue as follows:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Second dose: 4 joules/kg not to exceed the adult dose.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Third and successive doses: Defibrillation at 4 joules/kg up to 10 joules/kg not to exceed the adult dose.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>E. Search for possible causes as listed in SB204.</p>
<p>F. Administer Epinephrine 0.01 mg/kg IV/IO (0.1 mL/kg of 0.1 mg/ml Epinephrine, maximum 1 mg). If IV or IO is unattainable, give Epinephrine 0.1 mg/kg via endotracheal tube (0.1 mL/kg of 1 mg/ml Epinephrine, maximum 2.5 mg). Repeat Epinephrine every 3 to 5 minutes.</p>
<p>G. Administer Amiodarone 5 mg/kg (max 300 mg) IV/IO.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Amiodarone dose may repeat up to 2 times for refractory VF/pulseless VT.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Lidocaine may be substituted as: Lidocaine 1 mg/kg IV/IO push</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>H. After resuscitation has been initiated arrange for early transport and notify receiving hospital.</p>
<p>I. If return of spontaneous circulation is achieved, continue post-resuscitative care per C307: Post-ROSC.</p>
<p>J. If rhythm changes to another rhythm, go to the appropriate protocol.</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>NOTES:</strong></p>
<p>A. High Quality CPR (SB204) is considered the mainstay of therapy for Cardiac Arrest victims.</p>
<p>B. As in all pediatric cardiac arrests, airway control is a key factor in improving the odds of successful resuscitation.</p>
<p>C. AEDs may be used on children of ALL ages. For infants, a manual defibrillator is preferred to an AED for defibrillation. If a manual defibrillator is not available, an AED equipped with a pediatric dose attenuator is preferred. If neither is available, an AED without a pediatric dose attenuator may be used.</p>
<h2 id="medic-2">Medic</h2>
<p>D. Unlike adults, ventricular fibrillation is rare in children. Cardiac arrest is usually due to hypoxia or cardiac disease.</p>
<p>E. Both cuffed and uncuffed endotracheal tubes are acceptable for intubating infants and children. Training in inflating cuffed tubes to minimal airway occlusion pressure is important. In certain circumstances (e.g., poor lung compliance, high airway resistance, or a large glottic air leak) a cuffed endotracheal tube may be preferable to an uncuffed tube, provided that attention is paid to endotracheal tube size, position, and cuff inflation pressure.</p>
<p>F. Consider the use of a stopcock for the administration of Amiodarone and fluid boluses.</p>
<p>G. When choosing joules for defibrillation in pediatric patients, round up.</p>

