---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-pulseless-cardiac-arrest-asystole-pea">Pediatric Pulseless Cardiac Arrest (Asystole, PEA)</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Age is younger than 16 years.</p>
<p>B. Patient is unconscious.</p>
<p>C. Patient is apneic.</p>
<p>D. Patient has no pulse.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>II. EKG Findings</strong></p>
<p>A. Organized cardiac rhythm with QRS complexes indicating PEA, or</p>
<p>B. Asystole on the cardiac monitor in two or more leads.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Continue CPR and care per SB204.</p>
<ol>
<li>15:2 ratio with compressions if no physical signs of puberty (facial/axillary hair) - 30:2 if only one rescuer</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Reassess airway and breathing frequently, as hypoxia is a common cause of PEA/asystole.</p>
<p>C. Check a glucose, as hypoglycemia is another common cause of arrest in children.</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>D. Search for possible causes of Asystole/PEA as listed in SB204.</p>
<p>E. Epinephrine 0.01 mg/kg IV/IO (0.1 mL/kg of 0.1 mg/mL, maximum 1 mg).</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Repeat every 3-5 minutes.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If vascular access is not available, then give Epinephrine 0.1 mg/kg via endotracheal tube (0.1 mL/kg of 1 mg/mL, maximum 2.5 mg).</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>F. Administer normal saline 20 mL/kg IV/IO.</p>
<p>G. Contact medical control. Medical control may consider the following:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Additional 20 mL/kg fluid boluses.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Placement of size-appropriate supraglottic airway.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Needle decompression of the chest.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>H. After 30 minutes, consider termination of resuscitative efforts as detailed in the Determination of Death / Termination of ACLS protocol (A105).</p>
<p>I. If transporting, notify receiving hospital.</p>
<p>J. If return of spontaneous circulation is achieved, continue post-resuscitative care.</p>
<p>K. If rhythm changes to another rhythm, go to the appropriate protocol.</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. High Quality CPR (SB204) is considered the mainstay of therapy for Cardiac Arrest victims.</p>
<p>B. As in all pediatric cardiac arrests, airway control is a key factor in improving the odds of successful resuscitation.</p>
<h2 id="medic-2">Medic</h2>
<p>C. Since a main cause of PEA/asystole is hypoxia, airway management with adequate bag-valve-mask (BVM) ventilation is a priority. Placement of size-appropriate supraglottic airway or intubation should be considered if ventilation and oxygenation with BVM is difficult to maintain.</p>
<p>D. Both cuffed and uncuffed endotracheal tubes are acceptable for intubating infants and children. Training in inflating cuffed tubes to minimal airway occlusion pressure is important. In certain circumstances (e.g., poor lung compliance, high airway resistance, or a large glottic air leak) a cuffed endotracheal tube may be preferable to an uncuffed tube, provided that attention is paid to endotracheal tube size, position, and cuff inflation pressure.</p>

