---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-bradycardia">Pediatric Bradycardia</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Age is younger than 16 years.</p>
<p>B. Alteration of level of consciousness OR</p>
<p>C. Evidence of poor circulation (delayed capillary refill, or weak peripheral pulses) OR</p>
<p>D. Evidence of respiratory distress or failure.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>II. EKG Findings</strong></p>
<p>A. Cardiac rhythm is sinus bradycardia for child’s age.</p>
<p>B. <strong>General Guide for Pediatric Bradycardia:</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>0-3 years old: HR &lt; 100 bpm</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>3-9 years old: HR &lt; 60 bpm</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>9-16 years old: HR &lt; 50 bpm</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p><strong><em>The patient must be symptomatic before proceeding with this protocol.</em></strong></p>
<p>A. Ensure airway, apply 100% oxygen, bag-valve-mask (BVM) ventilate as needed, and recheck pulse rate.</p>
<p>B. If despite adequate oxygenation and ventilation, the heart rate is less than 60 in a newborn or child, perform chest compressions at a rate of 100 per minute.</p>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<p>C. If available, request ALS back-up or arrange to intercept an ALS unit as appropriate.</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>D. Establish IV/IO access.</p>
<p>E. Epinephrine (0.1 mg/ml) 0.01 mg/kg (0.1 ml/kg IV/IO). If vascular access is not available, then give epinephrine (1 mg/ml) 0.1 mg (0.1 mL/kg via ETT, maximum dose 2 ml).</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p>F. Reassess airway and breathing frequently.</p>
<p>G. Contact medical control.</p>
<h2 id="medic-2">Medic</h2>
<p>H. If symptomatic bradycardia persists, repeat epinephrine IV/IO every 3 to 5 minutes.</p>
<p>I. If symptomatic bradycardia persists, give atropine 0.02 mg/kg (min 0.1 mg, max 0.5 mg) IV/IO. ETT-0.04 mg/kg (max 2mg).</p>
<h2 id="all-3">ALL</h2>
<p>J. Reassess airway and breathing.</p>
<h2 id="medic-3">Medic</h2>
<p>K. If hypotensive, normal saline 20 mL/kg IV push.</p>
<h2 id="all-4">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. The most common cause of bradycardia in the child is hypoxia. Therefore, attention to airway is the most important intervention.</p>
<p>B. It is important to treat the patient and not the number. Remember that athletes may have heart rates of 40-60.</p>

