---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-supraventricular-tachycardia-psvt">Pediatric Supraventricular Tachycardia (PSVT)</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Age is younger than 16 years.</p>
<p>B. Older child may complain of chest pain or rapid heartbeat.</p>
<p>C. Heart rate in infants less than 2 years is usually greater than 220. Heart rate in older children is usually greater than 180.</p>
<p>D. The unstable patient displays signs of shock with weak or no distal pulse, delayed capillary refill, poor skin perfusion, and change in mental status.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>II. EKG Findings</strong></p>
<p>A. QRS duration less than 0.08 (2 little boxes).</p>
<p>B. P waves may or may not be seen.</p>
<p>C. Little variability in heart rate noted with respiration and movement.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Maintain airway and administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<p>B. If available, request ALS back-up or arrange to intercept an ALS unit as appropriate.</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>C. Obtain diagnostic EKG if available.</p>
<p>D. Stable Patient with Adequate Perfusion</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Consider one attempt at vagal maneuvers (crushed ice to the mid face for 15 seconds in infants; ask older patient to blow into occluded straw or bear down like having a bowel movement).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Attempt vascular access preferably in an antecubital vein or as close to the heart as possible. (Placing an IV sometimes converts the rhythm.)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Contact medical control.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Administer Adenosine 0.1 mg/kg (max 6 mg) rapid IV push followed by rapid 10 mL NS flush. Adenosine should be administered as close to the heart as possible, preferably in the antecubital vein. Consider use of a stopcock to administer 10 mL normal saline flush immediately following adenosine.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>May double the dose (0.2 mg/kg, max 12 mg) and repeat Adenosine administration once via rapid IV push followed by rapid 10 mL normal saline flush immediately following adenosine.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>E. Unstable Patient (Poor Perfusion):</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Contact medical control.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If IV access has been established, preferably in an antecubital vein, medical control may consider administration of adenosine (see above – stable patient with adequate perfusion).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If IV has not been established, prepare for immediate cardioversion.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If the patient is conscious and <strong>only on the order of a medical control physician</strong> give midazolam 0.1 mg/kg (max 5 mg) IV/IO or other medications as directed by medical control.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p><strong>Only on the order of a medical control physician</strong>: synchronized cardioversion 0.5 J/kg.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If unsuccessful, repeat synchronized cardioversion at 1 J/kg.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If unsuccessful, repeat synchronized cardioversion at 2 J/kg.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Reassess ABCs, consider CPR, and transport.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. Children without underlying heart disease or myocardial dysfunction will often tolerate SVT for up to 24 hours without compromise.</p>
<p>B. Round up when selecting joules on a defibrillator for cardioversion.</p>

