---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-stridor">Pediatric Stridor</h1>
<h3 id="this-protocol-is-in-a-flowchart-format-in-the-pdf-version.--the-following-is-a-text-based-interpretation-of-the-flowchart.">This protocol is in a flowchart format in the PDF version.  The following is a text-based interpretation of the flowchart.</h3>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong><br>
A. Age 6 months to 6 years.<br>
B. Barky “seal” sounding cough.<br>
C. Stridor at rest.<br>
D. Retractions in chest or neck.<br>
E. May have fever and cold symptoms.<br>
F. No history of foreign body aspiration.</p>
<p><strong>II. Differential Diagnosis</strong><br>
A. Croup<br>
B. Foreign Body Aspiration<br>
C. Epiglottitis<br>
D. Bacterial Tracheitis<br>
E. Asthma<br>
F. Anaphylaxis</p>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>Keep the patient calm.  You have have a parent or other trusted adult administer breathing treatments.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<ol start="2">
<li>If available, request ALS back-up or arrange to intercept an ALS unit as appropriate.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<ol start="3">
<li>Place the patient on a cardiac monitor and pulse oximetry.</li>
<li>Consider normal saline mist via nebulizer.  This can be very helpful in croup patients.</li>
<li>Contact medical control if considering nebulized epinephrine.</li>
<li>Medical control may order epinephrine 0.5mL of 1mg/mL mixed in 2.5 mL normal saline, administered via hand-held nebulizer with oxygen and a facemark.</li>
<li>Continue normal saline mist via nebulizer when the epinephrine nebulizer is complete.  Keep the patient calm.  You may have a parent or other trusted adult administer oxygen.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>IV. Notes</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>Pediatric patients with fever, drooling and stridor should be suspected to have epiglotitis or other potential source of airway obstruction.</li>
<li>Epiglotitis is a bacterial infection of the epiglottis that sometimes obstructs the tracheal opening.  These may worsen from sticking objects such as fingers or tongue depressors in the patient’s throat.  These patients are best treated by reassurance and immediate transportation to the hospital.</li>
<li>Have the patient breathe oxygen by mask or blow-by as long as this does not cause the patient to become upset.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<ol start="4">
<li>The purpose of the medical control call is to allow the medical control physician input into the decision to administer nebulizer epinephrine.</li>
</ol>

