---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-respiratory-distress-obstruction-or-foreign-body-aspiration">Pediatric Respiratory Distress (Obstruction or Foreign Body Aspiration)</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is younger than 16 years</p>
<p>B. Sudden onset shortness of breath in a previously well pediatric patient</p>
<p>C. Patient MAY have history suggestive of foreign body (FB) aspiration such as sudden onset of shortness of breath while eating or playing with a small toy/object.</p>
<p>D. May have on exam:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Unilateral, decreased, or no air movement</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Retractions and accessory muscle use</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Drooling</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Cyanosis or unconsciousness secondary to hypoxia.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>II. Differential Diagnosis</strong></p>
<p>A. Anaphylaxis</p>
<p>B. Croup</p>
<p>C. Epiglottitis</p>
<p>D. Bacterial tracheitis</p>
<p>E. Asthma</p>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. If the patient is alert, awake, and still breathing on his or her own (partial airway obstruction) minimize upsetting procedures:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Perform patient assessment. Do NOT perform a throat exam (may convert partial to full obstruction).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%. If patient is a young child, have the parent help administer the oxygen.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Allow patient to sit up in a position of comfort. If the patient is a young child, keep the patient with the parent and avoid unduly upsetting the child.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Apply cardiac monitor.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<ol start="5">
<li>
<p>Do not start an IV to avoid aggravating the child and worsening the airway obstruction.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If wheezing with known FB aspiration, consider an albuterol nebulizer treatment.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For diffuse wheezing <strong>without</strong> known FB aspiration, consider Pediatric Respiratory Distress (Wheezing or Asthma) Protocol P607 or Pediatric Anaphylaxis Protocol P609.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>B. If the patient is alert, awake, and obviously choking (complete airway obstruction):</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>For the infant less than one year, give 5 back slaps and up to 5 chest thrusts. Repeat this until the obstruction is relieved or the patient is unconscious.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For the child from older than 1 year old, give abdominal thrusts or Heimlich maneuver until obstruction is relieved or patient is unconscious.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If the obstruction is relieved, follow Protocol Section III, 1 through 4 above.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>C. If the patient is unconscious:</p>
<ol>
<li>Begin CPR and attempt to bag-valve-mask ventilate while preparations are made to intubate.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<ol start="2">
<li>
<p>Using the laryngoscope, visualize the posterior pharynx and vocal cords for evidence of a foreign body.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Remove any foreign bodies very carefully with a suction device or Magill forceps.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If no foreign body is seen or patient does not begin breathing spontaneously, intubate the trachea. If you suspect a foreign body is below the vocal cords but above the carina, it may be necessary to push the foreign body down the right main stem bronchus with the ET tube to aerate at least the left lung.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If above methods fail, perform needle cricothyrotomy (See Needle Cricothyrotomy—Pediatrics Protocol T708).</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<ol start="6">
<li>If available, request ALS back-up or arrange to intercept an ALS unit as appropriate.</li>
</ol>

