---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-respiratory-distress-wheezing-or-asthma">Pediatric Respiratory Distress (Wheezing or Asthma)</h1>
<h3 id="this-protocol-is-in-a-flowchart-format-in-the-pdf-version.--the-following-is-a-text-based-interpretation-of-the-flowchart.">This protocol is in a flowchart format in the PDF version.  The following is a text-based interpretation of the flowchart.</h3>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Age 3-15 years</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient complains of worsening shortness of breath or trouble breathing.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient USUALLY has a past medical history of asthma or seasonal allergies.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Lung exam has wheezing, decreased breath sounds, or poor air exchange.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>May have retractions, rapid respiratory rate, or pursed lip breathing.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>II. Differential Diagnosis</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>Bronchiolitis</li>
<li>Foreign Body Aspiration</li>
<li>Pneumonia</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Maintain airway and administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If the patient is in impending respiratory failure (i.e., extreme retractions, pale or cyanotic skin, and slow respirations), begin bag-valve-mask ventilation, consider intubation.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Allow patient to sit up in a position of comfort.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<ol start="4">
<li>Apply cardiac monitor.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<ol start="5">
<li>Apply PRAM score:</li>
</ol>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Criterion</th>
<th>Description</th>
<th>Score</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>O2 Saturation</td>
<td>&gt;= 95%</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>92-94%</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>&lt;92%</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Suprasternal Retraction</td>
<td>Absent</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Present</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Scalene Muscle Contraction</td>
<td>Absent</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Present</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Air Entry</td>
<td>Normal</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Decreased Base</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Decreased Base and Apex</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Minimal or Absent</td>
<td>3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Wheezing</td>
<td>Absent</td>
<td>0</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Expiratory Only</td>
<td>1</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Inspiratory (+/- Expiratory)</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Audible without stethoscope -OR- silent chest (minimal or no air entry)</td>
<td>3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>Pram Score (Max 12)</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Score</th>
<th>0-3</th>
<th>4-7</th>
<th>8-12</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Severity</td>
<td>Mild</td>
<td>Moderate</td>
<td>Severe</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table><h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<ol>
<li>Mild (0-3)</li>
<li>Administer 1 nebulized albuterol -OR- Albuterol MDI &amp; Spacer:<br>
a. &lt;15kg: 4 puffs<br>
b. &gt;= 15kg: 8 puffs</li>
<li>If ALS available, administer corticosteroids.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<ol>
<li>Moderate (4-7)</li>
<li>Administer 3 back to back nebulized albuterol/atrovent.</li>
<li>Administer corticosteroids.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-2">Medic</h2>
<ol>
<li>Severe (8-12)</li>
<li>Administer 3 back to back nebulized albuterol/atrovent.</li>
<li>Administer corticosteroids.</li>
<li>Establish IV access and administer NS bolus.</li>
<li>Provide maintenance IVF after bolus.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<ol>
<li>Impending Respiratory Failure</li>
<li><strong>CALL MEDICAL CONTROL</strong></li>
<li>Signs: lethargy, cyanosis, decreased respiratory effort, increased pCO2.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-3">Medic</h2>
<ol start="4">
<li>Consider epinephrine 1mg/mL IM.  The dose is 0.01mg/kg (max 0.3mL)</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="emt-1">EMT</h2>
<p>A. If available, request ALS back-up for:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Patient who is wheezing, grunting, has retractions, stridor or any other signs of respiratory distress.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient who doesn’t have a prescribed inhaler and the transport time is greater than 30 minutes.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Confirm that the patient has a prescribed inhaler, such as Proventil/Ventolin/ProAir (generic Albuterol). An over-the-counter medication such as Bronkaid Mist, Primatene Mist, Bronitin Mist, Asthma-Haler, and Epinephrine cannot be used.</p>
<p>C. If the patient only has a home nebulizer, you may assist with administering prescribed doses Albuterol (Proventil) aerosol 2.5 mg in 2.5 ml normal saline via handheld nebulizer, Duoneb (Albuterol plus Ipratropium Bromide that is premixed) or Xopenex (levalbuterol).</p>
<p>D. Check to see if the patient has already taken any doses prior to arrival. Note time and amount.</p>
<p>E. Do not use the inhaler if any of the following are present:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Inability of patient to use device.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Inhaler is not prescribed for the patient.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Medication is expired.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If the patient has met the maximum prescribed dose of their inhaler according to prescription label, contact medical control.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>F. Make sure inhaler is at room temperature and shake several times to mix the medication.</p>
<p>G. Take oxygen mask off the patient.</p>
<p>H. Tell the patient to exhale deeply and put the mouthpiece in front of the mouth. If the patient has a spacer device, it should be used.</p>
<p>I. Have patient depress the metered-dose inhaler as they begin to inhale deeply.</p>
<p>J. Instruct the patient to hold their breath for as long as comfortable, so the medication can be absorbed.</p>
<p>K. Put oxygen mask back on the patient.</p>
<p>L. Repeat a dose after one minute. If further medication is necessary beyond the patient’s prescribed number of doses, contact medical control.</p>
<p>M. Recheck vital signs (including pulse oximetry if available) and perform focused reassessment.</p>
<h2 id="all-3">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Wheezing in a patient WITHOUT a past medical history of asthma, may still be asthma, but should alert you to the possibility of a foreign body aspiration or pneumonia.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Steroids work by reducing airway inflammation, mucous plugging, and secretions, which can be seen within 1-2 hours after administration. Oral corticosteroids have been proven to reduce rates of hospital admission and length of ED stay if given early for children presenting to the ED with asthma exacerbations.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For patients who vomit their oral steroids, please document the episode and make sure it is part of handoff to the receiving institution, but do not re-dose the medication.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The scalene muscles are three paired muscles (anterior, middle and posterior), located in the lateral aspect of the neck. Collectively, they form part of the floor of the posterior triangle of the neck.</p>
</li>
</ol>

