---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-hypoglycemia-and-hyperglycemia">Pediatric Hypoglycemia and Hyperglycemia</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Age is younger than 16 years.</p>
<p>B. Neonates less than 30 days with a blood glucose level less than 45 mg/dL.</p>
<p>C. Pediatric patients older than 30 days with a blood glucose level less than 60 mg/dL.</p>
<p><strong>II. Hypoglycemia</strong></p>
<p>A. Consider possible reasons for hypoglycemia including but not limited to toxic ingestion.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>B. Place patient on cardiac monitor and obtain rhythm strip. If dysrhythmia is present, proceed to the appropriate protocol.</p>
<p>C. Although the patient may have a normal systolic blood pressure, if he or she is tachycardic for their age or shows other signs of hemodynamic shock, start a 20 mL/kg IV/IO bolus of normal saline (max 1 liter).</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>D. For hypoglycemia defined above, treat in one of the following manners until an improvement in mental status:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>If patient is able to swallow and protect airway administer oral glucose 5 - 15g or appropriate rapidly absorbed carbohydrate (high sugar content) fluid or food (such as orange juice). Dispense in small amounts; keep fingers out of mouth; EMS provider can lightly massage the area between the cheek and gum to enhance swallowing.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If oral glucose administration is not feasible due to patient age proceed to IV/IO method.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>E. If patient is unable to protect airway, administer the following until an improvement in mental status:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>5mL/kg of Dextrose 10% IV/IO</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For children less than 3 years of age or less than 15kg, use D10 only.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Only if Dextrose 10% is not available one of the following methods may be used. Dextrose 10% is the preferred medication.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Mix Dextrose 10% by diluting Dextrose 50% with normal saline to make Dextrose 10%. One part D50 and 4 parts normal saline. Ex: 50 mL D50 and 200 mL normal saline makes 250mL D10.</p>
<p>b. 1 mL/kg of Dextrose 50% IV/IO</p>
<p>c. 2 mL/kg of Dextrose 25% IV/IO</p>
<p>F. Doses may be repeated if repeat blood glucose assessment remains below levels noted above.</p>
<p>G. If peripheral IV/IO access is unobtainable, administer Glucagon 1 mg IM for children 6 years of age and older. For children less than 6 years of age, use 0.5 mg of Glucagon IM. Glucagon does not work reliably in younger children, however; so, after Glucagon administration, continue to attempt IV/IO access.</p>
<p><strong>III. Hyperglycemia</strong></p>
<p>A. Glucose Level is greater 400 mg/dL or glucometer reads “HIGH.”</p>
<p>B. If no evidence of pulmonary edema, administer a fluid bolus of 20mL/Kg not to exceed 1000mL IV/IO during transport.</p>
<p>C. Place patient on cardiac monitor for possibility of dysrhythmia.</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. D10 is made by mixing D50 1:4 with normal saline.</p>
<p>B. D25 is made by mixing D50 1:1 with normal saline.</p>
<p>C. It is very important that you verify that you have a working IV/IO. Dextrose which infiltrates into the surrounding tissues can be damaging to the tissues and blood vessels.</p>
<p>D. Especially for adolescent patients, although alcohol is a common cause of altered level of consciousness, it is rarely the cause of complete unresponsiveness. Do not let the patient’s alcohol intoxication cloud your judgment. It is safer to assume that the intoxicated patient has a serious medical problem and treat accordingly than it is to conclude that the patient is “just drunk.”</p>
<p>E. Younger children are particularly prone to developing hypoglycemia from alcohol ingestions.</p>
<p>F. Anticipate nausea/vomiting after administration of Glucagon.</p>

