---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-anaphylaxis--allergic-reaction">Pediatric Anaphylaxis / Allergic Reaction</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age under 16 years.</p>
<p>B. Suspected exposure to allergen (insect sting, medications, foods, or chemicals).</p>
<p>C. Patient has or complains of any of the following:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Respiratory difficulty, wheezing, or stridor</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Tightness in chest or throat</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Tachycardia or hypotension for age</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Flushing, hives, itching</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Swelling of the face, lips, or tongue</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Gastrointestinal symptoms: nausea, vomiting, diarrhea</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>CNS symptoms: anxiety, restlessness, weakness</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>II. Anaphylaxis Definition</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Serious, rapid onset (minutes to hours) reaction to a suspected trigger <strong>AND</strong></p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Two or more body systems involved (e.g., skin/mucosa, cardiovascular, respiratory, GI) OR</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Hemodynamic instability OR</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Respiratory compromise.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Maintain airway and administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
<p>B. <strong>Airway assessment and management are extremely important since airway compromise may develop rapidly at any time during the call.</strong></p>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<p>C. Request ALS back-up for a patient who has any of the following:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Hypotension</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Tachycardia</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>noisy/difficult breathing (including but not limited to wheezing &amp; stridor)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>received epinephrine by auto-injector, if indicated</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Determine if the patient has a prescribed epinephrine auto-injector (EpiPen, EpiPen Jr., Auvi-Q, Symjepi, generic epinephrine auto-injector) and/or albuterol metered dose inhaler available. Even if the patient’s condition does not warrant medication at the time, before you leave the scene, ask to take them and any spares for the trip to the hospital. This allows for treatment enroute if the patient’s condition should warrant or if a second dose is ordered by medical command.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>E. Remove allergen if possible (stinger from skin, etc.)</p>
<p>F. Check vital signs frequently; reactions may quickly grow more severe.</p>
<p>G. For patients with anaphylaxis, epinephrine should be administered as soon as possible.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>For patients who have been prescribed an auto-injector, administer it in accordance with manufacturer’s directions after obtaining patient consent.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For EMS supplied epinephrine auto-injectors, VERBAL MEDICAL DIRECTION must be obtained.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For patients 7.5 kg-10 kg, Auvi-Q® 0.1 mg, is appropriate. Otherwise, no auto-injector available for patients &lt;10 kg.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For patients ≥10 kg and &lt;25 kg, an 0.15 mg epinephrine auto-injector (i.e., EpiPen Jr®) is appropriate.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For patients ≥25 kg, 0.3 mg epinephrine auto-injector (i.e., EpiPen®) is appropriate.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>H. Auto-injector administration may be repeated every 5 – 15 minutes as needed.</p>
<ol>
<li>If epinephrine auto-injector is to be administered, then:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Assure injector is prescribed for the patient (if patient’s personal injector).</p>
<p>b. Check medication for expiration date (do not use if expired).</p>
<p>c. Remove safety cap from injector and double-check safety versus needle side.</p>
<p>d. Select appropriate injection site (see notes). If possible, remove clothing from the injection site. If removing the clothing would take too much time, the auto-injector can be administered through clothing avoiding seams.</p>
<p>e. Ensure injection site is properly restrained.</p>
<p>f. Push injector firmly and hold against the site for a minimum of 2-3 seconds then massage for 10 seconds.</p>
<p>I. Administer epinephrine (1mg/mL) intramuscularly in the anterolateral thigh. May repeat dose every 5-15 minutes as needed.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>&lt;15kg: 0.15mg (0.15mL)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>15-30kg: 0.3mg (0.3mL)</p>
</li>
<li>
<blockquote>
<p>30kg: 0.5mg (0.5mL)</p>
</blockquote>
</li>
</ol>
<p>J. If bronchospasm or wheezing is present assist patient with inhaler if they have one per Pediatric Respiratory Distress Protocol P607.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>K. Monitor cardiac rhythm</p>
<p>L. If bronchospasm or wheezing is present, administer albuterol (Proventil) 2.5 mg (&lt;30 kg) or 5 mg (≥30kg) via nebulizer, and treat per Pediatric Respiratory Distress protocol P607. Albuterol may be used without preceding epinephrine in patients with isolated, very minimal respiratory symptoms.</p>
<p>M. Administer diphenhydramine 1 mg/kg IV/IM/PO (max 50 mg). Diphenhydramine may be used without preceding epinephrine in patients with isolated rash and no other symptoms.</p>
<p>N. Initiate IV access. If the patient is hypotensive, begin 20 mL/kg normal saline or ringer’s lactate IV bolus (max 1 L) wide open.</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>NOTES:</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Anaphylaxis is extremely rare in babies. Without the history of sudden onset of rash and difficulty breathing, most babies with rashes and tachypnea have respiratory infections responsible for their symptoms.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Epinephrine is the drug of choice and the first drug that should be given in acute anaphylaxis.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Intramuscular injection leads to faster and more consistent blood levels than subcutaneous administration and is thus the standard of care.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Anterolateral thigh IM injection is preferred over deltoid IM injection.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>As injection into purely adipose tissue may be less effective, it may be preferable to use the distal anterolateral thigh rather than the proximal anterolateral thigh in obese patients.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>In the absence of reliable weight estimates, age 1 year may be used to initiate the use of the 0.15 mg auto-injector (i.e., EpiPen Jr®), and age 7 years may be used to initiate the use of the 0.3 mg auto-injector (i.e., EpiPen®).</p>
</li>
</ol>

