---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-seizure">Pediatric Seizure</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Age is younger than 16 years.</p>
<p>B. Recent suspicion of seizure activity based upon description from eyewitnesses, parents, or caretakers.</p>
<p>C. Patient may or may not have a known history of seizure disorder.</p>
<p>D. The patient may currently display seizure activity.</p>
<p>E. The patient may now be postictal (“after seizure”) with a decreased level of consciousness.</p>
<p>F. The patient may have focal neurological deficits, which should be noted.</p>
<p>G. The patient may have a fever.</p>
<p><strong>II. Differential Diagnosis</strong></p>
<p>A. Refer to Altered Level of Consciousness Protocol SB201.</p>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Maintain airway and administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
<p>B. Immobilize C-spine if evidence or history of significant trauma, otherwise position the patient in the lateral recumbent position to reduce the risk for aspiration with vomiting.</p>
<p>C. Suction as needed.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>D. If patient is actively seizing administer midazolam (Versed) IM. IM is preferred route.</p>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Pt Weight</th>
<th>Medication</th>
<th>Route</th>
<th>Dose</th>
<th>Frequency</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>less than 13kg</td>
<td>midazolam</td>
<td>IN/IM</td>
<td>0.2mg/kg</td>
<td>one, max 2.4mg</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>less than 13 kg</td>
<td>midazolam</td>
<td>IV/IO</td>
<td>0.1mg/kg</td>
<td>once, max 5mg</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>13-40kg</td>
<td>midazolam</td>
<td>IN/IM</td>
<td>5mg</td>
<td>once, max 5mg</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>13-40kg</td>
<td>midazolam</td>
<td>IV/IO</td>
<td>0.1mg/kg</td>
<td>once, max 5mg</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>greater than 40kg</td>
<td>midazolam</td>
<td>IN/IM</td>
<td>M410 dosing of 10mg</td>
<td>once, max 10mg</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>greater than 40kg</td>
<td>midazolam</td>
<td>IV/IO</td>
<td>2-5mg</td>
<td>once, max 5mg</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table><p>E. Be prepared to support the patient’s airway (nasopharyngeal airway) and breathing (bag valve-mask ventilation with 100% O2). Monitor ventilations with capnography.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>F. Check Glucose per protocol P608.</p>
<p>G. Place on cardiac monitor (if available).</p>
<p>H. For suspicion of overdose go to the Toxicological protocol M411.</p>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. Trauma to the tongue is unlikely to cause serious problems, but trauma to teeth may. Attempts to force an airway into the patient’s mouth can completely obstruct the airway. Use of a nasopharyngeal airway may be helpful.</p>
<p>B. Most patients will be postictal upon your arrival, needing only oxygen and airway maintenance.</p>
<p>C. In children and especially infants, seizure activity may not always be in the form of generalized tonic-clonic activity (i.e., grand-mal). Sometimes eye-deviation or unusual repetitive movements like lip smacking may be the only indication of seizure. Trust the parent’s or caretaker’s impressions of what is and is not seizure activity in a child with a known seizure disorder (e.g., children with special needs).</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>D. Please be aware that rectal diazepam (Valium) may have been administered to children with known seizure disorders prior to EMS arrival. This is especially true of children with special healthcare needs. Adding Versed on top of rectal Valium will exacerbate respiratory depression.</p>
<p>E. Most typical febrile seizures last less than 5 minutes and stop on their own without medications. A seizure, which has lasted longer than 5 minutes and is associated with fever, may not be a typical febrile seizure, and should be treated with Versed just as any other seizure lasting longer than 5 min.</p>

