---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-pain-management">Pediatric Pain Management</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. INCLUSION CRITERIA</strong></p>
<p>A. Ages 5 to less than 16 years of age</p>
<p>B. Patients experiencing acute pain.</p>
<p>C. No signs or symptoms of hemodynamic shock</p>
<p>D. Normo-/hypertensive</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Children (5-10 years): SBP &gt; 70 + (2 x age in years) mmHg</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Children (&gt;10 years): SBP &gt; 90 mmHg</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>E. No signs of respiratory depression</p>
<p>F. No altered level of consciousness, mental status change, or suspected head injury</p>
<p><strong>II. PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<p>A. Consider calling for ALS response to the scene or set up a rendezvous if transport to the hospital is longer than 10 minutes.</p>
<h2 id="ky-emt">KY-EMT</h2>
<p>B. Administer acetaminophen (Tylenol®) 15 mg/kg (max 975 mg) PO; see Pediatric Medication Chart for weight-based dosing.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Only consider if patient able to swallow and maintain patent airway.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Do not administer if patient has taken acetaminophen (Tylenol®) or acetaminophen-containing products (e.g., Vicodin, Norco, Percocet, or cold/flu remedies) within the past six hours or if actively vomiting.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Acetaminophen (Tylenol®) when used in conjunction with opioids can result in more effective pain control and lower total opioid requirements.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>C. Administer acetaminophen (Tylenol®) 15 mg/kg (max 975 mg) PO; see Pediatric Medication Chart for weight-based dosing.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Only consider if patient able to swallow and maintain patent airway.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Do not administer if patient has taken acetaminophen (Tylenol®) or acetaminophen-containing products (e.g., Vicodin, Norco, Percocet, or cold/flu remedies) within the past six hours or if actively vomiting.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Acetaminophen (Tylenol®) when used in conjunction with opioids can result in more effective pain control and lower total opioid requirements.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Perform continuous pulse oximetry and closely monitor patient’s respiratory status.</p>
<p>E. For moderate to severe pain, administer a <strong>single dose</strong> of one of the following:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Fentanyl 1 microgram/kg IV/IO/IM/SC (max 50 mcg) – administer over 3-5 minutes slow IV push to prevent rigid chest.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Fentanyl 2 micrograms/kg Intranasal (max 100 mcg) – Use the undiluted injectable fentanyl product (100 mcg/2 mL), draw up an extra 0.1 mL of drug solution to prime the atomizer and administer a max of 1 mL per nostril (if giving to larger kid and need to use 100 mcg, you should use the same atomizer for both nostrils).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Morphine sulfate 0.1 mg/kg IV/IO/IM/SC (maximum dose 5 mg).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Ketamine 0.6 mg/kg Intranasal (50mg/mL preferred concentration). Draw up an extra 0.1 mL of drug solution to prime the atomizer and administer a max of 1 mL per nostril.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Ketamine 0.2 mg/kg IV/IO – administer over 1 minute slow IV push</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>F. Recheck blood pressure, respirations, and mental status.</p>
<p>G. If the patient experiences a drop in systolic blood pressure to less than (2 x age in years) + 70, give a 20 mL/kg (max 500 mL) normal saline IV bolus.</p>
<p>H. <strong>If patient has an allergy to Opioids, pain is not relieved, or for subsequent doses, contact online medical control.</strong></p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>NOTES:</strong></p>
<p>A. It is appropriate to give acetaminophen and fentanyl or morphine concurrently for moderate to severe pain.</p>
<p>B. Care should be taken when administering Morphine IM/SC to avoid dose stacking. Only administer one dose except in cases of prolonged extrication or transport.</p>
<p>C. Parenteral medications come in various concentrations – double check all calculations prior to administration.</p>
<p>D. If indicated, pain medications should be given prior to splinting.</p>
<p>E. <strong>When dosed appropriately, complications such as respiratory depression and hypotension are rare in children.</strong></p>
<p>F. Pain control is an important medical intervention. Studies show that children are treated for pain much less often than adults with the same injuries. It is the intention of the Protocol Subcommittee that pediatric patients with burns and isolated fractures/dislocations who meet the above criteria be given pain relief medication.</p>

