---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-head-or-spinal-trauma">Pediatric Head or Spinal Trauma</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. INCLUSION CRITERIA</strong></p>
<p>A. Age is younger than 16 years.</p>
<p>B. History of MVC, diving accident, fall or other trauma.</p>
<p>C. History of a loss of consciousness following head injury.</p>
<p>D. Infant “found down” from unknown etiology or infant with suspicion of physical abuse.</p>
<p>E. Head contusions, abrasions, or lacerations.</p>
<p>F. Fluid or blood from nose, ears, or mouth.</p>
<p>G. Altered mental status.</p>
<p>H. May have loss of sensation or movement.</p>
<p>I. May have pain in back or neck.</p>
<p>J. No signs of shock. If shock is present, refer to Hemorrhagic Shock Protocol P613.</p>
<p><strong>II. PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p>A. Control the airway and administer oxygen to correct oxygen saturation &lt;95%.</p>
<p>B. If altered mental status, assure good oxygenation and ventilation of the patient and maintain control of the C-spine.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Elevate the head to 30 degrees while following T704 Spinal Motion Restriction Protocol.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Ventilate the patient normally with a goal of EtCO2 of 35-45 mmHg.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<ol start="3">
<li>ONLY if the patient has obvious asymmetric pupils with altered mental status, administer 3% saline solution if available.</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>PEDIATRIC DOSE: 4 mL/kg IV/IO ONCE; max 500 mL.</strong></p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>C. Immobilize patient with appropriately sized equipment.</p>
<p>D. Begin transport as soon as possible to destination hospital as directed in Trauma Triage Protocol SB208.</p>
<p>E. Obtain vital signs and monitor cardiac rhythm.</p>
<p>F. Assess a GCS or level of consciousness using the AVPU scale.</p>
<p>G. If hypoglycemia is suspected, then check glucose. If glucose is less than 60 mg/dL then refer to Pediatric Hypoglycemia protocol P608.</p>
<p>H. If GCS is less than 14 or the patient is not an “A” on the AVPU scale or spinal cord injury is suspected, then contact the receiving hospital.</p>
<p>I. If narcotic overdose is suspected, then refer to M411 Toxicologic Emergencies.</p>
<p><strong>NOTES:</strong></p>
<p>A. Cardiovascular shock is not usually due to head injuries. If patient is in shock, consider another cause for hypotension.</p>
<p>B. Remember that restlessness can be due to hypoxia and shock, not just head injury.</p>
<p>C. In any multiple injury or multi-organ trauma patient, spine trauma should be assumed until proven otherwise in a hospital emergency department.</p>

