---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-hemorrhagic-shock-withwithout-suspected-head-injury">Pediatric Hemorrhagic Shock with/without Suspected Head Injury</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is younger than 16 years</p>
<p>B. Significant penetrating injury to extremities or trunk (neck, chest, abdomen, pelvis), with suspected blood loss and risk for hypotensive shock.</p>
<p>C. The trauma patient with suspected head injury in addition requires special considerations.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Hypotension and Hypoxia (Oxygen Saturation (SpO2) less than 90%) are known to secondarily exacerbate brain injury.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The target SBP is [70+ (2 x age)] or greater, with a goal of improvement in any initial altered mental status.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>II. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Aggressively manage the airway; if patient is maintaining adequate respirations, administer Oxygen.</p>
<ol>
<li>If patient is not maintaining adequate respirations, support with bag-valve-mask ventilations.</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Identify and treat life-threatening respiratory problems (i.e., open chest wounds, flail chest). See Protocol T701 for management of Tension Pneumothorax.</p>
<p>C. If patient is a victim of any blunt trauma, or a penetrating injury to the head or neck, immobilize patient with full spinal precautions as per Protocol T704.</p>
<p>D. Control all external bleeding.</p>
<p>E. Aggressively manage to decrease body-heat loss. Hypovolemic patients rapidly become hypothermic.</p>
<p>F. Transport as soon as possible to appropriate hospital as directed in Trauma Triage Protocol. Unless the patient is entrapped, scene time should be less than 10 minutes. Hospital notification should be made whenever possible.</p>
<p>G. Continuously reassess mental status, breath sounds, perfusion, and vital signs at least every 5 min.</p>
<p>H. Continue secondary assessment throughout transport.</p>
<p>I. For patients with penetrating trauma and no suspected head injury who are mentating normally with palpable peripheral pulses, it is acceptable to initiate and continue transport without IV/IO fluids.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>J. For patients whose mental status and/or peripheral pulses require IV/IO fluids resuscitation, initiate a minimum of one IV/IO without delaying transport. Syringe push 20 mL/kg of normal saline and reassess the patient’s mental status and/or peripheral pulses. If no improvement, repeat fluid bolus and contact medical control.</p>

