---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-submersion-injury">Pediatric Submersion Injury</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age under 16 years</p>
<p>B. Patients submerged under water or recently pulled from the water with coughing, respiratory distress, or lifelessness.</p>
<p><strong>II. Exclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. The victim shows signs of rigor mortis, lividity, or injury incompatible with life.</p>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Remove the victim from the water if still required. Perform warming as described in protocol M412.</p>
<p>B. If there is suspicion that the events involved a diving accident or axial load to the head, apply cervical spine precautions as described in protocol T704.</p>
<p>C. Ensure adequate airway, breathing, and oxygenation.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Note coughing, cyanosis, or respiratory distress.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Administer oxygen via non-rebreather mask for all patients with cough, cyanosis, hypoxia, or respiratory distress. Consider BVM ventilating if patient remains hypoxic despite this or is not breathing adequately.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>All victims of submersion events for which EMS responds should be transported for medical evaluation. Even patients with mild residual symptoms may develop significant pulmonary edema in the hours to come.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>D. <strong>For patients with lifelessness,</strong> establish if the water has obvious signs of ice and, if possible, an estimate of the duration of submersion. Proceed with one of the following pathways:</p>
<ol>
<li><strong><em>If there are obvious signs of ice on the water (or in the area in the case of moving water)</em></strong>, ensure ALS back-up and proceed with protocols M412 Hypothermia and Cold Emergencies and SB204 Cardiac Arrest.</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Maintain airway and administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
<p>b. Initiate transport to a Pediatric Level 1 Trauma Center capable of performing pediatric extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). In our region, this is Cincinnati Children’s in Cincinnati.</p>
<p>c. Notify receiving facility.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>
<p><strong><em>If there are NO obvious signs of ice, and the patient has been submerged for 30 minutes or longer</em></strong>, the evidence suggests the patient is unlikely to survive. Ensure ALS back-up and proceed with the cardiac arrest protocols P601 or P602 depending on whether their initial presentation is VF/VT or PEA/asystole. Contact medical control to discuss CPR limits and destination.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p><strong><em>If there are NO signs of ice, and the patient has been submerged for less than 30 minutes or the time is unknown</em></strong>, ensure ALS back-up and proceed with the cardiac arrest protocols P601 or P602 depending on whether their initial presentation is VF/VT or PEA/asystole). Transport to the closest Pediatric Level 1 Trauma Center. Notify receiving hospital.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. Patients experiencing drowning have been noted to have their largest fall in temperature after being removed from the water. Efforts should be made to remove wet clothing, insulate with dry warm covering, and cover patient’s head (not face) to begin the rewarming process.</p>
<p>B. It is unnecessary to perform spinal immobilization on every submersion injury patient. Patients at highest risk for spinal injury tend to be adolescents and those who drown after diving and horse playing.</p>
<p>C. Evidence for survival after ice water submersion exists in the form of case reports, with variable outcome. These patients may benefit from ECMO. Although there are hospitals in the region capable of performing ECMO on infants and adults, <strong>currently, Cincinnati Children’s Burnet Campus is the only hospital prepared to perform ECMO on children.</strong></p>
<p>D. Submersion time has been noted in literature to be the most important factor related to patient outcome.</p>
<p>E. Hypoxic arrest is the most common etiology of arrest in drowning victims.</p>
<p>F. It is generally unnecessary to obtain the victim’s temperature in the field.</p>

