---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-psychiatric-protocol">Pediatric Psychiatric Protocol</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is under 16 years.</p>
<p>B. A medically stable patient who is manifesting unusual behavior including violence, aggression, altered affect, or psychosis.</p>
<p>C. Patient demonstrates behavior including violence, delirium, altered effect, or psychosis.</p>
<p>D. Normal vital signs and blood glucose for the patients’ age. (see Appendix I)</p>
<p><strong>II. Exclusion Criteria and Differential Diagnosis</strong></p>
<p>A. Anemia</p>
<p>B. Cerebrovascular accident</p>
<p>C. Drug / Alcohol intoxication</p>
<p>D. Dysrhythmias</p>
<p>E. Electrolyte imbalance</p>
<p>F. Head Trauma</p>
<p>G. Hypertension</p>
<p>H. Hypoglycemia</p>
<p>I. Hypoxia</p>
<p>J. Infection (especially meningitis / encephalitis)</p>
<p>K. Metabolic disorders</p>
<p>L. Myocardial ischemia / infarction</p>
<p>M. Pulmonary Embolism</p>
<p>N. Seizure</p>
<p>O. Shock</p>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. If EMS personnel have advanced knowledge of a violent or potentially dangerous patient or circumstance, consideration should be given to staging in a strategically convenient but safe area prior to police arrival. If staging is indicated and implemented, dispatch should be notified that EMS is staging, the location of the staging area, and to have police advise EMS when scene is safe for EMS to respond.</p>
<p>B. If EMS intervention is indicated for the violent or combative patient, patients should be gently and cautiously persuaded to follow EMS personnel instructions. If EMS has cause to believe the patient’s ability to exercise an informed refusal is impaired by an existing medical condition, EMS shall, if necessary, restrain the patient for purposes of providing appropriate care. Such restraint shall, whenever possible, be performed with the assistance of police (see Restraint Protocol P616). It is recognized that urgent circumstances may necessitate immediate action by EMS prior to the arrival of police.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Urgent circumstances requiring immediate action are defined as:</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient presents an immediate threat to the safety of self or others.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient presents an immediate threat to EMS personnel.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Urgent circumstances authorize, but do not obligate, restraint by EMS personnel prior to police arrival. The safety and capabilities of EMS is a primary consideration. Police shall immediately be requested by EMS in any urgent circumstance requiring restraint of a patient by EMS personnel.</p>
<h2 id="oh-all">OH-ALL</h2>
<p>D. If police initiate restraint inconsistent with the medical provisions of the Restraint Protocol P616, with the intent that EMS will transport the patient, police must prepare to submit an APPLICATION FOR EMERGENCY ADMISSION in accordance with Section 5122.10 ORC, or the patient must be placed under arrest with medical intervention indicated. Police shall, in either instance, accompany EMS to the hospital.</p>
<p>E. APPLICATION FOR EMERGENCY ADMISSION can only be implemented by a:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Psychiatrist</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Licensed clinical psychologist</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Licensed physician</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Health or police officer</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Sheriff or deputy sheriff</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="ky-all">KY-ALL</h2>
<h3 id="this-section-also-applies-to-in-all">This section also applies to IN-ALL</h3>
<p>F. If police initiate restraint inconsistent with the medical provisions of the Psychiatric Protocol M408 and/or Pediatric Restraint Protocol P616, with the intent that EMS will transport the patient, police must submit written documentation which describes the behavior of the person which caused the peace officer to take the person into custody, or the patient must be placed under arrest with medical intervention indicated. Police shall, in either instance, accompany EMS to the hospital.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>G. EMS shall not be obligated to transport, without an accompanying police officer, any patient who is currently violent, exhibiting violent tendencies, or has a history indicating a reasonable expectation that the patient will become violent.</p>
<p>H. If the patient is medically stable, then he/she may be transported by police in the following circumstances:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Patient has normal orientation to person, place, time, and situation.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient has no evidence of medical illness or injury.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient has exhibited behavior consistent with mental illness.</p>
</li>
</ol>

