---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-restraint-protocol">Pediatric Restraint Protocol</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is under 16 years.</p>
<p>B. This protocol is intended to address the need for medically indicated and necessary restraint. It shall not apply to regulate, or restrict in any way, operational guidelines adopted by a provider agency addressing use of force related to non-medical circumstances (i.e., civil disturbances, legitimate self-defense relative to criminal behavior).</p>
<p>C. Patient restraints are to be used only, when necessary, in situations where the patient is violent or potentially violent and may be a danger to themselves or others. EMS providers must remember that aggressive violent behavior may be a symptom of a medical condition such as but not limited to:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Anemia</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Cerebrovascular accident</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Drug / Alcohol intoxication</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Dysrhythmias</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Electrolyte imbalance</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Head Trauma</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Hypertension</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Hypoglycemia</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Hypoxia</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Infection (especially meningitis / encephalitis)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Metabolic disorders</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Myocardial ischemia / infarction</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Pulmonary Embolism</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Seizure</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Shock</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Toxicological ingestion</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>II. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient health care management remains the responsibility of the EMS provider. The method of restraint shall not restrict the adequate monitoring of vital signs, ability to protect the patient’s airway, compromise peripheral neurovascular status or otherwise prevent appropriate and necessary therapeutic measures. It is recognized that the evaluation of many patient parameters requires patient cooperation and thus may be difficult or impossible.</p>
<p>B. It is recommended to have Law Enforcement on scene.</p>
<p>C. Refer to Pediatric Psychiatric Emergencies Protocol (P615) for aid in dealing with the combative patient.</p>
<p>D. <strong>The least restrictive means shall be employed.</strong></p>
<p>E. Verbal de-escalation</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Validate the patient’s feelings by verbalizing the behaviors the patient is exhibiting and attempt to help the patient recognize these behaviors as threatening.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Openly communicate, explaining everything that has occurred, everything that will occur, and why the imminent actions are required.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Respect the patient’s personal space (i.e., asking permission to touch the patient, take pulse, examine patient, etc.).</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>III. Physical Restraints</strong></p>
<p>A. All restraints should be easily removable by EMS personnel.</p>
<p>B. Restraints applied by law enforcement (i.e., handcuffs) require a law enforcement officer to remain available to adjust the restraints as necessary for the patient’s safety. The protocol is not intended to negate the ability for law enforcement personnel to use appropriate restraint equipment to establish scene control.</p>
<p>C. To ensure adequate respiratory and circulatory monitoring and management, patients shall NOT be transported in a face down prone position.</p>
<p>D. Restrained extremities should be monitored for color, nerve, and motor function, pulse quality and capillary refill at the time of application and at least every 15 minutes.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>IV. Chemical Restraints</strong></p>
<p>A. Chemical restraints may be required before, after, or in place of physical restraints. Any patient who continues to be a danger to themselves or others despite physical restraints, or those who present an extreme danger while attempting physical restraint, may be chemically restrained as follows.</p>
<p>B. Administer midazolam (Versed) 0.1 mg/kg (max 5 mg) IV/IO or 0.2 mg/kg (Max 10mg) IN/IM Exposure and cleaning of skin is highly recommended but may not be feasible; injection through clothing and prior to skin cleaning is allowed if crew safety would be compromised.</p>
<p>C. When able and safe, place patient on cardiac monitor and continuous pulse oximetry and end-tidal capnography.</p>
<p>D. When able and safe, administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
<p>E. When able and safe, check blood glucose level.</p>
<p>F. At no time shall a patient be left unattended after receiving chemical restraint.</p>
<p>G. Any patient receiving chemical restraint must be attended to and transported by a paramedic.</p>
<p>H. Repeat dose(s) of midazolam (Versed) may be ordered by on-line medical control.</p>
<p>I. Pre-arrival notification is highly recommended so the receiving Emergency Department can be prepared for the safe transfer of a combative or violent patient.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>V. Documentation of Restraints</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient restraint shall be documented on the run sheet and address any or all the following appropriate criteria:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>That an emergency existed and the need for treatment was explained to the patient.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>That the patient refused treatment or was unable to consent to treatment (such as unconscious patient).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Evidence of the patient’s incompetence (or inability to refuse treatment).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Failure of less restrictive methods of restraint (e.g., if conscious, failure of verbal attempts to convince the patient to consent to treat).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Assistance of law enforcement officials with restraints, or orders from medical control to restrain the patient, or any exigent circumstances requiring immediate action, or adherence to system restraint protocols.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>That the treatment and/or restraint were for the patient’s benefit and safety.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The type of restraint employed (soft, leather, mechanical, chemical).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Any injuries that occurred during or after the restraint.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The limbs restrained (“four points”).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Position in which the patient was restrained.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Circulation checks every 15 minutes or less (document findings and time).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The behavior and/or mental status of the patient before and after the restraint.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. Intramuscular midazolam is more rapidly absorbed than other benzodiazepines, including diazepam and lorazepam, making it uniquely ideal for treatment of the acutely agitated patient. Onset 5-10 minutes.</p>
<p>B. Midazolam is as effective as haloperidol in acutely agitated and combative patients (Am J Emerg Med 8:97) and has less potential cardiovascular side effects and drug-drug interactions than haloperidol.</p>
<p>C. Respiratory depression is a known side effect of benzodiazepines. Monitor and treat respiratory depression as needed. The use of flumazenil is not recommended and is potentially harmful because it may cause uncontrollable seizures. The risk of harm is especially present when the patient history is unknown, unclear, or incomplete.</p>
<p>D. Midazolam may be administered intranasal (IN); however, its efficacy in agitated and combative patients is unknown.</p>
<p>E. Use of benzodiazepines, including intramuscular Midazolam, for acutely agitated and combative patients is supported by American College of Emergency Physicians clinical policy [Ann Emerg Med 47(1): 79, 2006].</p>

