---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-brue">Pediatric BRUE</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Introduction</strong></p>
<p>A. Patients &lt; 1 year of age</p>
<p>B. Some infants have transient events involving a combination of altered consciousness, respiration and muscle tone that are alarming for caregivers. In the past these events have been referred to as an “apparent life-threatening event” (ALTE). However, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommended removing the term “life-threatening” so that caregivers are not unnecessarily alarmed. The new term is “brief, resolved, unexplained event” (BRUE).</p>
<p>C. Indications:</p>
<ol>
<li>In general, BRUE refers to events lasting &lt; 1 minute with one or more of the following:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Absent, decreased, or irregular breathing</p>
<p>b. Cyanosis or pallor</p>
<p>c. Altered level of responsiveness.</p>
<p>d. Marked change in muscle tone.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>In addition, infants must otherwise appear well and be back at their baseline state of health at the time of presentation. Thus, infants who are febrile, coughing or showing any signs of distress or other deviations from their baseline are not considered to have a possible BRUE.</li>
</ol>
<p>D. The term BRUE only applies to events for which there is no underlying cause, which can be determined after a thorough history and physical examination.</p>
<p>II. <strong>Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Ensure adequate airway.</p>
<p>Perform a thorough history and physical examination. Routine monitoring should include Pulse Oximetry. Blood sugar and capnography assessment should be conducted when patient condition indicates.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>Establish cardiac monitoring when patient condition indicates.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>B. Determine if the event was high risk by one or more of the following:</p>
<ol>
<li>Criteria of a high-risk BRUE:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Age &lt; 60 days</p>
<p>b. The patient was born before 32 weeks gestation or has a corrected gestational age (post-conception age) &lt; 45 weeks.</p>
<p>i. Gestational weeks at birth plus weeks since birth equals corrected age.</p>
<p>ii. Example: Born at 36 weeks gestation. Now 7 Weeks old. Corrected age = 43 weeks</p>
<p>c. CPR was performed by a trained medical professional.</p>
<p>d. Event lasted &gt;1 minute.</p>
<p>e. Has had a BRUE/ALTE in the past</p>
<p>f. Features of concern in the patient’s history such as concern for child abuse, family history of sudden death or SIDS.</p>
<p>C. High risk BRUE should be transported to a pediatric hospital / pediatric Emergency Department as they may be admitted for observation.</p>
<p>D. <strong>BRUE not established as High Risk by above criteria, routine transport is recommended for evaluation at an Emergency Department – contact Medical Control prior to obtaining refusal. Consider letting patient guardian talk with Medical Control Physician if they insist on refusal. All refusals obtained should be advised to follow up with primary care and report BRUE.</strong></p>
<p>E. Continually reassess throughout transport</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>F. Do NOT establish IV/IO Access unless specific indicator noted, or treatment required.</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<h3 id="the-pdf-version-of-this-protocol-includes-a-brue-decision-making-flowchart-unable-to-be-reproduced-here.--refer-to-the-full-pdf-protocol.">The PDF version of this protocol includes a BRUE Decision-Making Flowchart, unable to be reproduced here.  Refer to the full PDF protocol.</h3>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. The BRUE Definition has a strict age limit.</p>
<p>B. The BRUE diagnosis is based on characterization of features for the event not on the caregiver’s perception that the event was life threatening.</p>
<p>C. A determination should be made whether the infant had cyanosis or pallor, rather than determining whether “color change” occurred. Episodes of flushing or redness are not consistent with BRUE.</p>
<p>Child abuse is a serious and common cause of a BRUE. Patients who have experienced abusive head trauma may present with a BRUE. Consider child abuse when the event is inconsistently reported or is incompatible with the child’s developmental age. Also consider child abuse when the patient has unexplained bruising and/ or a torn frenulum in the mouth.</p>

