---


---

<h1 id="ky-safe-transportation-by-ems---pediatric">KY-Safe Transportation by EMS - Pediatric</h1>
<h2 id="ky-all">KY-ALL</h2>
<p><strong>Patient Transport</strong></p>
<p>An ill or injured child must be restrained directly to the cot in a manner that prevents ramping or sliding in a collision.</p>
<p> A belt/strap looped over each shoulder and attached to a non-sliding cot member.</p>
<p> A soft, sliding, or breakaway connector holding the shoulder straps together on chest.</p>
<p> Belt/strap anchored to non-sliding cot member and routed over thighs, not around waist.</p>
<p><strong>Note:</strong> Standard belt systems do not adequately secure child to the cot during a crash.</p>
<p>Ill or injured child/infant (5 to 80 lbs) who can tolerate a semi-upright position may be secured using a child passenger safety seat.</p>
<p> Use a convertible child safety seat that has a front and rear belt path.</p>
<p> Position safety seat on cot facing the foot-end with backrest fully elevated.</p>
<p> Consider removing mattress.</p>
<p> Secure safety seat with 2 pairs of belts in both the forward &amp; rear positions.</p>
<p> Place the shoulder straps of the harness through slots just below shoulders.</p>
<p> For infants, place rolled towels on sides of child to maintain centered position.</p>
<p>Note: Non-convertible safety seats cannot be secured properly to the cot.</p>
<p> For infants who cannot tolerate a semi-upright position or who must lie flat:</p>
<p>o Use car bed, if available, that can be secured against both rearward and forward motion.</p>
<p>o Position car bed across cot so child lies perpendicular to cot.</p>
<p>o Fully raise backrest and anchor car bed to cot with 2 belts.</p>
<p>o Fasten car bed harness snugly to infant</p>
<p>Use of Child Passenger Safety Seat after Involvement in Motor vehicle Crash:</p>
<p>Child safety seats may be used after involvement in a minor crash.</p>
<p>All of the following must apply to be considered a minor crash.</p>
<p> Visual inspection including inspection under movable seat padding does not reveal any cracks or deformation.</p>
<p> The vehicle in which the child safety seat was installed was capable of being driven from the scene of the crash.</p>
<p> The vehicle door nearest the child safety seat was undamaged.</p>
<p> There were no injuries to any of the vehicle occupants.</p>
<p> The air bags (if any) did not deploy.</p>

