---


---

<h1 id="hemorrhagic-shock-withwithout-suspected-head-injury">Hemorrhagic Shock with/without Suspected Head Injury</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Patient’s age is 16 years or older.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Any significant extremity or truncal wound (neck, chest, abdomen, pelvis), with or without obvious blood loss or hypotension, irrespective of blood pressure. If the patient is coherent, and has a palpable radial pulse, the blood loss has likely stopped.1</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The trauma patient <strong>with a head injury</strong> requires special consideration.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Hypotension (Systolic Blood Pressure (SBP) less than 90 mmHg) and hypoxia (oxygen saturation (SpO2) less than 90%) are known to exacerbate secondary brain injury.</p>
<p>b. The target SBP is 90 mmHg or greater, and improvement in any initial altered mental status.</p>
<ol start="4">
<li>Patients experiencing hemorrhagic shock <strong>without a head injury</strong> are only volume resuscitated when they have a decreased mental status or absent radial pulses.</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>II. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Aggressively manage the airway and administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
<p>B. If the patient is a victim of trauma, immobilize the patient as per T704 Spinal Immobilization Protocol.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>C. If the patient is not maintaining adequate respirations, intubate with C-spine precautions if the patient will tolerate the attempt. No more than one minute should be spent attempting endotracheal intubation in patients with spontaneous breathing.</p>
<p>D. Identify and treat life-threatening respiratory problems (i.e., open chest wounds, flail chest, etc.). For treatment of tension pneumothorax see T701 Tension Pneumothorax Decompression Protocol.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>E. Control all external bleeding.</p>
<p>F. Begin transport as soon as possible to appropriate hospital as directed in SB207 Guidelines for Assessment/Transport of Adult Trauma Patients Protocol. Unless the patient is entrapped, scene time should be less than 10 minutes. Hospital notification should be made whenever possible.</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>G. Without delaying transport, initiate 2 large bore IVs of Normal Saline (NS). Begin with a fluid bolus of 500 mL NS and reassess the patient’s mental status. If no improvement, continue with an additional fluid bolus of 500 mL NS.</p>
<p>H. In patients that do not respond to fluid resuscitation, consider untreated tension pneumothorax as possible cause of refractory shock.</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p>I. In patients with penetrating trauma who are mentating normally and/or have a palpable radial pulse, it is acceptable to initiate and continue transport without the administration of IV fluids.</p>
<p>J. Hypothermia prevention measures should be initiated while fluid resuscitation is being accomplished including removal of wet clothing, blankets, or anything that will retain heat and keep patient dry.</p>
<p>K. Patients who are hypovolemic quickly become hypothermic. All patients should be aggressively managed to decrease body-heat loss.</p>
<p>L. Continue secondary assessment throughout transport and continuously reassess mental status, perfusion and vital signs, and breath sounds at least every 5 minutes.</p>
<p>M. In patients with blunt trauma and pelvic pain or who have altered mental status and a mechanism consistent with possible open book pelvic fracture (i.e., high-speed MVC, motorcycle/ATV crashes, pedestrian struck, and falls from significant height), consider the placement of a pelvic binder.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>A pelvic binder SHOULD NOT be used in elderly patients with isolated falls from standing height with hip or pelvic pain.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Any commercially available pelvic binder may be used.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If no commercial pelvic binder is available, a properly placed improvised pelvic binder with a bed sheet can be substituted.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. A reasonable performance goal for an EMS system is that 90% of patients who have traumatic shock and are not entrapped should be delivered to a definitive trauma care facility within 30 minutes from the time of injury.</p>
<p>B. Patients with penetrating chest trauma, abnormal mental status, and absence of a radial pulse are especially in need of immediate transport to definitive care. Early airway management per T705 - Airway Management.</p>

