---


---

<h1 id="head-or-spinal-trauma">Head or Spinal Trauma</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is 16 years or older.</p>
<p>B. History of loss of consciousness following head injury, OR</p>
<p>C. History of motor vehicle accident, diving accident, fall, or other trauma.</p>
<p>D. Head contusions, abrasions, or lacerations, OR</p>
<p>E. Evidence of significant facial trauma (i.e., fractures) OR</p>
<p>F. Fluid or blood from nose, ears, or mouth, OR</p>
<p>G. Altered mental status.</p>
<p>H. May have loss of sensation or movement.</p>
<p>I. May have pain in back or neck.</p>
<p>J. No signs of shock. If shock is present, refer to S500 Hemorrhagic Shock and/or Suspected Head Injury Protocol.</p>
<p><strong>II. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Aggressively manage the airway:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Assess for hypoxemia (SpO2 &lt;95%) continuously. Hypoxemia should be avoided.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If the patient has a patent airway and is breathing adequately, administer oxygen to maintain SpO2 &gt; 95%. If hypoxemia cannot be corrected with supplemental oxygen, initiate Airway Management Protocol (T705).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If the patient does not have a patent airway, is not breathing adequately or has an altered mental status initiate Airway Management Protocol (T705).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Maintain a respiratory rate of 10 breaths per minute. Goal end tidal CO2 is 35-45 mmHg.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>ONLY if patient has asymmetric pupils (&gt;1mm difference) and is comatose, hyperventilate to an ETCO2 of 3-5 mmHg lower than established value. STOP if pupils normalize.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Frequently monitor VS (approximately every 5 minutes) and reassess for signs of shock. If shock becomes present, refer to S500 Hemorrhagic Shock and/or Suspected Head Injury Protocol.</p>
<ol>
<li>Target systolic blood pressure is 100 mm Hg or greater.</li>
<li>Imobilize the patient with full spinal precautions as per T704 Spinal Motion Restriction Protocol.</li>
<li>Elevate the head of the bed/top of the backboard whenever possible.</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Measure GCS initially and after airway management. Measure GCS before any sedative drugs are given.</p>
<p>E. Measure pupil size initially. Reassess pupil size frequently.</p>
<p>F. Begin transport as soon as possible to appropriate hospital as directed in SB207 or Geriatric Guidelines for Assessment/Transport of Adult Trauma Patients Protocol SB209.</p>
<p>G. If GCS is less than 14, or spinal cord injury is suspected, then hospital notification should be made whenever possible.</p>
<p>H. If signs and symptoms of altered mental status are present (i.e., suspected hypoglycemia or narcotic overdose), then check Blood Glucose and refer to SB201 Altered Mental Status Protocol.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>I. Place patient on cardiac monitor. If a dysrhythmia is present, then proceed to the appropriate protocol.</p>
<p>I. Establish IV/IO access.</p>
<p>J. If patient has signs of cerebral herniation which include coma and unilateral or bilateral blown pupil, posturing, or decline in GCS during transport &gt;2 points then consider administration of 500 mL 3% saline solution if available.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. Shock is not usually due to head injuries. If patient is in shock, consider another cause for the hypotension.</p>
<p>B. Remember that restlessness can be due to hypoxia and shock, not just head injury.</p>
<p>C. Patients with traumatic brain injuries have worse outcomes when they are suffering from the “H Bombs.” These are hyperventilation, hypotension, and hypoxia.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Unless a patient is actively herniating (AMS with unequal pupils) target their end tidal CO2 to 35-45 mmHg, which avoids hyperventilation. Often this is accomplished with a respiratory rate of 10 breaths a minutes.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Aggressively treat hypotension with IV fluids. While 100 mmHg is listed as the optimal target, there is some research suggesting the target number may be higher. One hypotensive prehospital blood pressure is related to worse patient outcomes.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Aggressively treat hypoxia with high flow oxygen to maintain oxygen saturations greater than 95%.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>SOURCES:</p>
<p>1: Al Lulla, Angela Lumba-Brown, Annette M. Totten, Patrick J. Maher, Neeraj Badjatia, Randy Bell, Christina T. J. Donayri, Mary E. Fallat, Gregory W. J. Hawryluk, Scott A. Goldberg, Halim M. A. Hennes, Steven P. Ignell, Jamshid Ghajar, Brian P. Krzyzaniak, E. Brooke Lerner, Daniel Nishijima, Charles Schleien, Stacy Shackelford, Erik Swartz, David W. Wright, Rachel Zhang, Andy Jagoda &amp; Bentley J. Bobrow (2023): Prehospital Guidelines for the Management of Traumatic Brain Injury – 3rd Edition, Prehospital Emergency Care, DOI: 10.1080/10903127.2023.2187905</p>
<p>2: Spaite DW, et al. Optimal prehospital blood pressure in major traumatic brain injury: a challenge to the current understanding of hypotension. Ann Emerg Med 2022;80(1)Jul:46-59. DOI 10.1016/j.annemergmed.2022.01.045.</p>

