---


---

<h1 id="major-burns-thermal-or-electrical">Major Burns (Thermal or Electrical)</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. INCLUSION CRITERIA</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient of any age.</p>
<p>B. Partial thickness burns greater than 20% of body surface area, OR</p>
<p>C. Full thickness burns greater than 15% of body surface area, OR</p>
<p>D. Any patient with electrical injury.</p>
<p>E. Singed nasal or facial hair, soot or erythema of mouth, or respiratory distress.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>F. If EKG findings are other than normal sinus rhythm, sinus tachycardia, or atrial fibrillation with controlled ventricular response, proceed to appropriate arrhythmia protocol.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>II. PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p>A. Evaluate scene for safety.</p>
<p>B. Remove patient from source of burn including all clothing. Cover with clean/dry sheet.</p>
<p>C. Maintain airway and administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%. If there is suspicion for carbon monoxide or cyanide poisoning, provide supplemental oxygen regardless of pulse oximetry reading.</p>
<p>D. If patient is pulseless and apneic, begin CPR</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>E. If patient is unconscious or has any respiratory distress, intubate immediately.</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p>F. Remove all rings, constricting bands and prostheses from all extremities.</p>
<p>G. Cover with blankets to avoid hypothermia.</p>
<h2 id="medic-2">Medic</h2>
<p>H. Initiate IV/IO access. Provide crystalloid fluids: 5 y/o 125 ml/hr. | 6-13y/o 250ml/hr. | 14+ 500ml/hr.</p>
<p>I. Consider the administration of pain medication in alert and hemodynamically stable patients, per protocol S505.</p>
<h2 id="all-3">ALL</h2>
<p>J. Transport patient to an appropriate facility capable of treating major burns.</p>
<p>K. Notify the receiving facility.</p>
<p>L. Consider Carbon Monoxide and Cyanide poisoning refer to M411 Toxicological Emergencies.</p>
<p>M. Burn Gel Pads such as Hydro Gel may be used as a dressing on most minor superficial and partial thickness burns. These products may provide a soothing/cooling effect to the burn area without the risk of hypothermia that may be induced by a moist saline dressings. Some of the Hydro Gel type pads require a secondary dressing (Kerlix/Kling, etc) to secure the pad over the burn.</p>
<h3 id="notes">Notes</h3>
<p>A. Two methods to estimate the percentage of body burned.  (This includes partial and full thickness burns only.</p>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Body Part</th>
<th>Adults</th>
<th>Children</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Head</td>
<td>9%</td>
<td>18%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Anterior Trunk</td>
<td>18%</td>
<td>18%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Posterior Trunk</td>
<td>18%</td>
<td>18%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Each Upper Extremity</td>
<td>9%</td>
<td>9%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Each Lower Extremity</td>
<td>18%</td>
<td>14%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Genitals/Perineum</td>
<td>1%</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table><p><strong>Palmar Method</strong>: The patient’s entire palmar surface is approximately 1% of their total body surface area.</p>

