---


---

<h1 id="eye-injuries">Eye Injuries</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. INCLUSION CRITERIA</strong></p>
<p>A. History of actual or suspected eye injury.</p>
<p>B. Examination consistent with suspected eye injury.</p>
<p><strong>II. PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p>A. OPEN GLOBE INJURY:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>If there is an impaled object, stabilize it in place and cover other eye to prevent movement.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If there is evidence of a penetrating eye injury such as visible globe laceration or fluid draining from the globe, cover the affected eye with a metal eye patch or other similar ridged, non-absorbent material. Do not wrap eye under pressure or press on the globe.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Do not use Morgan Lens, proparacaine, or topical medications if open globe injury is suspected.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Displacement of eye should be treated with moist sterile dressing and prehospital notification made.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>B. CHEMICAL EXPOSURE OR NO EVIDENCE OF OPEN GLOBE INJURY:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>If the patient has a chemical exposure to the eye or a non-penetrating foreign body in the eye, proceed in the following manner:</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Begin irrigation by instilling copious amounts of tap water, sterile water, or normal saline for at least 15 minutes.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Use of an on-site commercial eye-wash station is also acceptable prior to transport.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<ol start="4">
<li>
<p>Administer Pain Medication per S505.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Administer Ondansetron per M405.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If <strong>no</strong> suspected open globe injury:</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Instill two drops of 0.5% proparacaine (Alcaine) or tetracaine into the affected eye.</p>
<p>b. Warn the patient not to rub the eye while the cornea is anesthetized, since this may cause corneal abrasion and greater discomfort when the anesthesia wears off.</p>
<p>c. After 20 minutes, a second dose of proparacaine may be given if needed.</p>
<p>d. Do not use Morgan Lens, proparacaine, or topical medications with an open globe injury.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>NOTES:</strong></p>
<p> Proparacaine administration may cause burning or stinging of the eye initially. The time until onset of anesthesia after proparacaine instillation ranges from 6 to 20 seconds.</p>
<p> Local instillation in the eye rarely produces adverse effects. Systemic reactions are unlikely when used in recommended doses.</p>
<p> Remember that eye injuries can cause a great deal of patient anxiety. Provide reassurance.</p>
<p> When not contraindicated by other injuries or need for spinal immobilization, then transport the patient with the head of the bed elevated at least 30 degrees.</p>
<p> Morgan Lens, bulb syringes, nasal cannulas, or IV tubing can be used to flush eyes.</p>

