---


---

<h1 id="pre-hospital-pain-management">Pre-Hospital Pain Management</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS</strong></p>
<p>A. This protocol is for the management of acute pain, including pain from suspected trauma, including but not limited to thermal and chemical burns, frostbite, crush injuries, fractures, dislocations, sprains, and abdominal pain including unilateral flank pain.</p>
<p>B. This protocol is NOT for the treatment of chronic pain.</p>
<p>C. Medical Control must be contacted if you feel that narcotics are needed for pain from a chronic condition or disorder.</p>
<p>D. There must be documentation of patient’s pain during the initial patient contact, during treatment, and after any interventions made for pain, as well as vital signs before each administration of medications.</p>
<p>E. Always consider the weight of your patient when dosing pain medication, especially in the elderly.</p>
<p><strong>II. HISTORICAL FINDINGS</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is 16 years and old. (Patients &lt;16 years old, refer to P611 Pediatric Pain Management)</p>
<p>B. Patient is experiencing acute moderate to severe pain.</p>
<p><strong>III. PHYSICAL FINDINGS</strong> (applies to Fentanyl and Morphine ONLY)</p>
<p>A. No signs or symptoms of circulatory shock.</p>
<p>B. Systolic BP is greater than 100 mmHg.</p>
<p>C. No signs of respiratory depression.</p>
<p>D. No altered level of consciousness, mental status change, or suspected head injury.</p>
<p><strong>IV. PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<p>A. Consider calling for ALS response to the scene or set up a rendezvous if transport to the hospital is longer than 10 minutes.</p>
<p>B. Determine patient’s pain score assessment using standard pain scale.</p>
<p>C. Consider initial use of non-pharmaceutical pain management techniques.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Position of comfort.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Use of ice packs and/or splints</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Verbal reassurance or distraction to minimize anxiety.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="ky-emt">KY-EMT</h2>
<p>D. Mild Pain</p>
<ol>
<li>Administer acetaminophen (Tylenol®) 650-1000mg PO.</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Only consider if patient able to swallow and maintain patent airway.</p>
<p>b. Do not administer if patient has taken acetaminophen (Tylenol®) or acetaminophen-containing products (e.g., Vicodin, Norco, Percocet, or certain cold/flu remedies) within the past six hours or if actively vomiting.</p>
<p>c. Acetaminophen (Tylenol®) when used in conjunction with opioids can result in more effective pain control and lower total opioid requirements.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>E. Mild Pain</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Administer acetaminophen (Tylenol®) 650-1000mg PO.</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Only consider if patient able to swallow and maintain patent airway.</p>
<p>b. Do not administer if patient has taken acetaminophen (Tylenol®) or acetaminophen-containing products (e.g., Vicodin, Norco, Percocet, or certain cold/flu remedies) within the past six hours or if actively vomiting.</p>
<p>c. Acetaminophen (Tylenol®) when used in conjunction with opioids can result in more effective pain control and lower total opioid requirements.</p>
<p>F. Moderate to Severe Pain</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Administer acetaminophen as directed above and/or one of the following:</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Fentanyl 25-100 micrograms IV/IO/IN/IM/SC, repeated every 5 minutes as needed (IV/IO/IN) or every 15 minutes as needed (IM/SC) <strong>OR</strong></p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Morphine Sulfate 2-10 mg IV/IO/IM/SC, repeated every 5 minutes as needed (IV/IO) or every 15 minutes as needed (IM/SC) <strong>OR</strong></p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Ketamine can be administered according to the dosing chart below or 0.2mg/kg IV/IO (SLOW PUSH OVER 1 MINUTE or infusion in 100ml NS or D5W over 15 minutes) or 0.5-1 mg/kg IM/SC</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Ketamine dosing is based on ideal body weight.</p>
<p>b. Use first when there is a concern for opioid addiction or if already on high doses of opioids for pre-existing medical conditions.</p>
<p>c. Ketamine when used in conjunction with opioids can result in more effective pain control and lower total opioid requirements.</p>
<p>G. Perform continuous pulse oximetry and closely monitor patient’s respiratory status.</p>
<p>H. Recheck BP, respirations, and mental status.</p>
<p>I. Consider administration of antiemetics to prevent nausea (See M405 Nausea and Vomiting)</p>
<p>J. If the patient experiences persistent respiratory depression after receiving Fentanyl or Morphine, Naloxone can be administered 0.4 to 4 mg IV/IO/IN/IM. Refer to M411 Toxicological Emergencies protocol.</p>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Height</th>
<th>IV Dose</th>
<th>IV mLs (10mg/mL)</th>
<th>IV mLs (50mg/mL)</th>
<th>IM Dose</th>
<th>IM mLs (50mg/mL)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>&lt;4’11"</td>
<td>7.5mg</td>
<td>0.75mL</td>
<td>0.15mL</td>
<td>30mg</td>
<td>0.6mL</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>5’-5’5"</td>
<td>10mg</td>
<td>1mL</td>
<td>0.2mL</td>
<td>40mg</td>
<td>0.8mL</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>5’5"-5’11"</td>
<td>15mg</td>
<td>1.5mL</td>
<td>0.3mL</td>
<td>60mg</td>
<td>1.2mL</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>6’-6’5"</td>
<td>17.5mg</td>
<td>1.75mL</td>
<td>0.35mL</td>
<td>70mg</td>
<td>1.4mL</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>&gt;6’5"</td>
<td>20mg</td>
<td>2mL</td>
<td>0.4mL</td>
<td>80mg</td>
<td>1.6mL</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table><h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>NOTES:</strong></p>
<p>A. Care should be taken when administering narcotics IM/SC to avoid dose stacking. Only administer one dose except in cases of prolonged extrication or transport.</p>
<p>B. Parental medications come in various concentrations — double check all calculations prior to administration.</p>
<p>C. If indicated, pain medication should be given prior to splinting.</p>

