---


---

<h1 id="administration-of-tranexamic-acid-txa">Administration of Tranexamic Acid (TXA)</h1>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. <strong>Evidence of significant blunt or penetrating trauma</strong> based on the history of present illness and or physical exam findings. (ex: ejection from automobile, rollover MVC, fall &gt; 20 feet, pedestrian struck, penetrating injury to neck, torso, etc.</p>
<p>B. <strong>Age All</strong> (pediatrics and adult) with evidence of or concern for severe internal or external hemorrhage. (ex: bleeding requiring a tourniquet, unstable pelvic fracture, two or more proximal long-bone fractures, flail chest etc.)</p>
<p>C. Evidence of or concern for severe internal or external hemorrhage or patient will likely be a candidate for a blood transfusion (e.g.: rollover/ejection MVA, fall &gt;20ft., pedestrian struck, external bleeding requiring tourniquet application, unstable pelvic fracture, two or more long-bone fractures, 1 or more amputations, flail chest, penetrating injury to neck, torso, etc.)</p>
<p><strong><em>AND</em></strong></p>
<p>D. Presence of hemodynamic instability as evidenced by</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Sustained systolic blood pressure &lt; 90mmHg or &lt;100mmHg if patient age is &gt; 55 years (sustained is defined as 2 independent blood pressure measurements)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Sustained heart rate &gt; 110 beats per minute</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Pediatric Hypotension → a sign of uncompensated shock</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Neonates (0-28 days): SBP &lt; 60 mmHg</p>
<p>b. Infants (1 mo – 12 months): SBP &lt; 70 mmHg</p>
<p>c. Children (1 yr – 10 years): SBP &lt; 70 + (2 x age in years) mmHg</p>
<p>d. Children (&gt;10 years): SBP ≤ 90 mmHg</p>
<ol start="4">
<li>
<p>Sustained tachycardia for age (see chart below)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Tachypnea for age (see chart below)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Cool pale skin with cap refill &gt;2 seconds</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong><em>AND</em></strong></p>
<p>E. <strong>Time since the initial injury is KNOWN to be less than 3 hours.</strong> It is preferable that TXA be administered as soon as possible after the initial traumatic insult. The greatest benefit to patients is seen when TXA is administered within 1 hour of injury.</p>
<p><strong>II. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Aggressively manage the airway and administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
<p>B. Control all external bleeding and manage hemorrhagic shock per protocol S500</p>
<p>C. If the patient meets the above inclusion criteria administer TXA as follows:</p>
<ol>
<li><strong>Mix 1 g of TXA in 100 mL of 0.9% Normal Saline and infuse over approximately 10 minutes IV or IO.</strong> (If given as an IV push, may cause hypotension)</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>Pediatric &lt; 12 years:</strong> 15 mg/kg IV over 10 mins (max 1 g)</p>
<p><strong>Pediatric ≥ 12 years:</strong> 1 g IV over 10 mins</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>
<p>Use dedicated IV/IO line if possible and <strong><em>Do NOT administer in the same IV or IO line as blood products, factor VIIa, or Penicillin</em></strong></p>
</li>
<li>
<p>During radio report, notify the receiving trauma center that TXA was initiated during  transport per protocol.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>When transferring care to hospital staff and completing PCR: note the time of injury and time of TXA administration.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>III.</strong> Exclusion Criteria:</p>
<p>A. Time elapsed from initial injury is unknown or is known to be greater than 3 hours.</p>
<p>B. Patients with clear contraindications for anti-fibrinolytic agents (evidence of active intravascular thrombotic disease or disseminated intravascular coagulation, etc.).</p>
<p>C. TXA should not be given to isolated closed head injury.</p>
<p>D. TXA should NOT be given to a patient who has received or will receive prothrombin \ complex concentrate (PCCs), factor VIIa, or factor IX complex concentrates as this may increase the risk of thrombotic events.</p>
<p>E. TXA should be used carefully in the setting of urinary tract bleeding as ureteral obstruction due to clotting has been reported.</p>
<p>F. Previous allergic reaction to TXA</p>
<p>G. Medical control discretion as to the appropriateness of TXA administration in any particular patient.</p>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. Tranexamic Acid is an anti-fibrinolytic synthetic lysine analogue that inhibits clot breakdown and thus reduces hemorrhage.1,2,3 Other potential beneficial mechanisms of action including decreasing the systemic inflammatory response to trauma are currently being explored.3</p>
<p>B. Part of the physiologic response to surgery or trauma in any patient is the formation and subsequent breakdown (fibrinolysis) of intravascular clots.4 In some cases, clot break down can become excessive (hyper-fibrinolysis) thus causing increased hemorrhage and blood loss.4</p>
<p>C. Since 2010, two large clinical trials (CRASH-2 and MATTERs) have examined the specific role for TXA in adult trauma patients with evidence of or concern for severe hemorrhage. These studies found significantly favorable reductions in all-cause mortality when victims of trauma received TXA.4,6</p>
<p>D. TXA is now a Class I recommendation in the U.S. Military’s Tactical Combat Casualty Care Guidelines and is included in the World Health Organization list of essential medicines.1,7</p>
<p>E. There have been some questions about how to administer TXA over 10 minutes. This is an approximate time. Infusing 100 mL over approximately 10 minutes can be done by a variety of methods including but not limited to: counting drops of a macro or mico drip set; on a pump; or just estimating. The range of infusion should be between 5 and 15 minutes.</p>
<p><strong>References:</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Roberts I, Kawahara T. Proposal for the inclusion of Tranexamic acid (anti-fibrinolytic-lysine analogue) in the WHO model list of essential medicines. June 2010.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Roberts I, Shakur H, Ker K, Coats T, on behalf of the CRASH-2 Trial Collaborators. Antifibrinolytic drugs for acute traumatic injury. Cochran Database of Systematic Reviews 2011, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD004896.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Pusateri AE, Weiskopf RB. et al. Tranxexamic Acid and Trauma: Current Status and Knowledge Gaps with Recommended Research Priorities. _Shock_2013;39:121-126.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>CRASH-2 collaborators. Effects of Tranexamic acid on death, vascular occlusive events, and blood transfusion in trauma patients withsignificant Haemorrhage (CRASH-2): a randomized placebo controlled trial. <em>Lancet</em> 2010; 367:23-32.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>CRASH-2 collaborators. Effects of Tranexamic acid in traumatic brain injury: a nested randomized, placebo controlled trial (CRASH-2 Intracranial bleeding study). _BJM_2011.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Morrison JJ, Dubose JJ, Ramussen TE, and Midwinter MJ. Military application of tranexamic acid in trauma emergency resuscitation (MATTERs) study. _Arch Surg_2011;287.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Tactical Combat Casualty Care Guidelines available from URL:<a href="https://www.naemt.org/education/trauma-education/naemt-tccc">https://www.naemt.org/education/trauma-education/naemt-tccc</a></p>
</li>
</ol>

