---


---

<h1 id="special-trauma-situations">Special Trauma Situations</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Introduction</strong></p>
<p>A. The following situations may develop rapidly into a long-term technical rescue event involving complicated medical and extrication techniques. This requires constant reevaluation of treatments with the overall goal being the safety, treatment, removal, and rapid transport of the patient.</p>
<p>B. Trapped extremities should be considered for those involving lower and upper long-bone areas and not finger/toe injuries.</p>
<p>C. Providers should consider consultation with on-scene experts in removal/disassembly of articles entrapping patients. Providers should also consider early consultation with:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>On-line Medical Control physician.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>HEMS activation for evacuation and/or on-scene physician.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Early treatment collaboration with industrial response teams, technical rescue teams, and fire- based responders.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>II. Inclusion</strong></p>
<p>A. Patients of any age</p>
<p>B. Mechanism of injury concerning for any/all of the following:</p>
<ol>
<li>Suspension Trauma</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Patient suspended above the ground with or without a harness.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Crush Injury</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Patient currently or recently with one or more trapped extremity.</p>
<ol start="3">
<li>Compartment syndrome</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Victim with injury to an extremity that may cause bleeding into a closed compartment of same extremity.</p>
<ol start="4">
<li>Rhabdomyolysis</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Victim unable to move for an extended period of time or as a consequence of the above situations.</p>
<p><strong>III. Treatment</strong></p>
<p>A. Suspension Trauma Management:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Ensure scene safety and remove victim to ground safely and quickly as possible.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If unable to get to ground quickly, have victim assume a horizontal position, or take pressure off legs.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>When victim on ground place patient in POC and initiate rapid transport.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Recheck neurological status and PMS on frequent basis.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Crush injury Management:</p>
<ol>
<li>While attempting to extricate:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Ensure scene safety and remove victim as safely and quickly as possible.</p>
<p>b. Consider early application of PPE to patient to prevent further injury including coverings for debris and respirator for airway protection.</p>
<p>c. Maintain patent airway &amp; ventilation status with emphasis being placed on freeing space around patients’ chest.</p>
<p>d. Coach patient/provide hemorrhage control as situation and safe access allows.</p>
<p>e. Consider early temperature management.</p>
<p>f. Coordinate with Rescue Team Leader/Incident Command for administration of oxygen/nebulized treatments if this can be done without creating dangerous atmosphere or consider fresh air delivery system during rescue operation.</p>
<p>g. Assess mentation and PMS status on frequent basis.</p>

