---


---

<h1 id="epistaxis">Epistaxis</h1>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Age &gt;16</p>
<p>B. Epistaxis of either traumatic or non-traumatic causes</p>
<p><strong>II. Exclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Known allergy to oxymetazoline (Afrin), neosynephrine, or tranexamic acid (TXA).</p>
<p>B. Known or suspected skull fracture.</p>
<p>C. Known or suspected intranasal foreign body.</p>
<p>D. Known or suspected intranasal surgery within 45 days.</p>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Instruct the patient to blow the nose hard to remove all blood clots. This may take multiple attempts to achieve clot removal. The patient should state that they can now breathe through the nares.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>B. Oxymetazoline or Neosynephrine – preferred initial treatment</p>
<ol>
<li>Spray 4 puffs of oxymetazoline or neosynephrine into the bleeding nostril. Attempt to time the puff while the patient is inhaling to facilitate further deeper application of the medication into the nasal passage.</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Tranexamic Acid – secondary treatment</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Draw up the undiluted contents of a standard ampule of tranexamic acid (100 mg/ml) solution used for injection into a syringe and place an atomizer to the syringe tip.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Spray 0.5 ml of the tranexamic acid into the bleeding nostril. Attempt to time the puff while the patient is inhaling to facilitate further deeper application of the medication into the nasal passage.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>D. If unclear as to which nostril is bleeding, apply nasal spray treatment into both nostrils.</p>
<p>E. Instruct the patient to either swallow or spit out any excess medication.</p>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p>F. Apply a standard nose clip to the nares. It should compress the soft tissue of the distal nose to the septum. The nose clip should not compress the bony portion of the nasal bridge.</p>
<p>G. Have the patient maintain their head tilted forward or in a position of comfort. The patient should avoid swallowing or aspirating blood.</p>
<p>H. Obtain vital signs.</p>
<p>I. Establish whether the patient is on any type of blood thinner (aspirin, Plavix, warfarin, Eliquis, Xarelto, Pradaxa).</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>J. If the patient is on a blood thinner, or exhibits abnormal blood pressure or pulse, treat per SB205 SHOCK.</p>
<p>K. If bleeding from nostril(s) persists, repeat dose of nasal spray after 10 minutes.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>IV. Notes</strong></p>
<p>A. It is highly recommended that prior to initiating treatment, the crew don appropriate PPE, including facial and eye protection.</p>
<p>B. It is department preference on selection of which initial treatment medication to utilize.</p>

