---


---

<h1 id="traumatic-arrest-adult--pediatric">Traumatic Arrest (Adult &amp; Pediatric)</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patients of all ages.</p>
<p>B. Patient is without a palpable pulse.</p>
<p>C. Obvious traumatic mechanism of injury (blunt or penetrating).</p>
<p>D. Trauma as the cause of arrest.</p>
<p><strong>II. DO NOT INITIATE RESUSCITATIVE EFFORTS IF</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient has injuries not compatible with life such as:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Decapitation or hemicorporectomy.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Burn beyond recognition.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Obvious signs of prolonged death including rigor mortis (in the absence of hypothermia), decomposition, or lividity.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Isolated penetrating trauma should rarely be considered incompatible with life.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>III. Transportation/Disposition</strong></p>
<p>A. Initiate rapid transport (expedite scene time and provide treatment enroute) for the following patients:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Penetrating trauma causing cardiac arrest with arrest witnessed by EMS providers – rapid transport to nearest Trauma Center.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Traumatic arrest in a female patient with known pregnancy &gt;24 weeks or with uterine fundus palpable at or above the umbilicus – rapid transport to nearest Emergency Department for potential of post-mortem Caesarean section.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Traumatic arrest patients that are under 18 can be transported to a Pediatric Trauma Center.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>IV. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. If patient is unresponsive and has no palpable pulse and has evidence of trauma being the most likely cause of cardiac arrest:</p>
<ol>
<li>Position patient in position where resuscitative efforts can be initiated.</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Apply manual c-spine stabilization or c-collar (T704) if situation allows.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>
<p>Start chest compressions at a rate of 100 per minute.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Control obvious external hemorrhage by application of pressure dressing or tourniquet as needed (T710).</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<ol start="4">
<li>
<p>If the mechanism of injury was blunt trauma or penetrating injury to the torso, perform bilateral needle thoracostomy for decompression of tension pneumothorax (T701).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Provide oxygenation and ventilation through bag-valve-mask or advanced airway as indicated (T705).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Obtain vascular access through placement of intravenous or intraosseous line (T711) and initiate fluid resuscitation with normal saline (1 liter or 20ml/kg for pediatric patients) with open flow or on pressure bag (IO).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Apply cardiac monitor and treat the displayed rhythm as per table 1.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Contact Medical Control for Termination of Resuscitation.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Transport immediately if ROSC is achieved.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>V. Cardiac Rhythm Interpretation</strong></p>
<p>A. Table 1 illustrates recommendations on treatment and termination of resuscitative efforts.</p>
<p>Table 1: Cardiac Rhythm on Monitor</p>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Asystole or PEA &lt;40 bpm</th>
<th>PEA &gt;40 bpm</th>
<th>Vfib/Vtach</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Contact medical control regarding termination of resuscitation</td>
<td>Fluid Resuscitation Consider repeat needle decompression Transport to nearest trauma center</td>
<td>Defibrillate per protocol C300 or P601 Fluid resuscitation Consider repeat needle decompression Transport to nearest trauma center</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table><h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>VI. Post-Termination Body Movement</strong> (a good faith effort to categorize the cause of death is reasonable)</p>
<p>A. Likely homicide or child abuse – avoid body movement unless necessary for life safety.</p>
<p>B. Likely natural causes – body may be relocated as appropriate for the situation and public good.</p>
<p>C. Unclear cause – avoid disturbance unless necessary for life safety; consider involving law enforcement and/or the coroner’s office.</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>VII. Termination Of Resuscitation (TOR) Inside an Ambulance</strong></p>
<p>A. TOR within an ambulance is reasonable if the patient meets S509 criteria (unless &lt; 16 years old).</p>
<p>B. After TOR, the ambulance should continue to the destination hospital.</p>
<p>C. Body may be removed from the ambulance after TOR, assuming the ambulance is not the site of homicide.</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong><br>
A. Traumatic arrest from both blunt and penetrating trauma carries high rates of mortality with poor rates of resuscitation in the prehospital setting.</p>
<p>B. The preferred management of the traumatic arrest patient is surgical intervention at an appropriate verified trauma center.</p>
<p>C. Due to the mechanism of injury and cause of cardiopulmonary arrest, traumatic arrest is approached in a separate fashion from primary cardiac arrest. A state of post-traumatic circulatory arrest may exist due to severe hypovolemia, tension pneumothorax, or cardiac tamponade, conditions that may be treatable in the prehospital setting.</p>
<p>D. The protocol aims to delineate patients who would benefit best from resuscitative efforts and recommend termination of unnecessary resuscitative efforts and transports on patients with minimal chance of survival through a systematic approach.</p>
<p>E. Currently there is significant controversy concerning the use of ACLS/PALS-type medications including epinephrine/atropine in the setting of traumatic, hypovolemic, arrest. At present time, we DO NOT recommend the use of these drugs in the treatment approach described above.</p>
<p>F. In a situation where the mechanism of injury appears inconsistent with the patient’s condition and not severe enough to induce traumatic arrest, consider a primary medical cause for the patient’s cardiac arrest and defer to protocol SB204.</p>
<p>G. All patients that are being transported should go to the nearest verified trauma center, except the situation described in III.A.2 above.</p>
<p>H. Post-ROSC cooling as described in C307 is CONTRAINDICATED in the traumatic arrest patient and should NOT be initiated.</p>
<p>I. TXA is not beneficial in traumatic cardiac arrest.</p>
<p>J. The use of a backboard for full spinal immobilization can be foregone in favor of rapid transport in the traumatic arrest patient if manual c-spine stabilization or collar is applied.</p>
<p>K. In ambulance TOR should be an exceedingly rare event, and the ability to do so should not alter sound principles of field resuscitation.</p>

