---


---

<h1 id="altered-level-of-consciousness--altered-mental-status">Altered Level of Consciousness / Altered Mental Status</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient of any age</p>
<p>B. Patient has one of the following:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Patient describes the feeling of impending loss of consciousness.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient has a decreased Level of Consciousness of any length.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Altered Level of Consciousness (ALOC) is a period where GCS less than 15.</p>
<ol start="3">
<li>Patient has an Altered Mental Status</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Altered Mental Status (AMS) is a state where a patient is not alert and oriented to person, place, time, and situation within the context of the expected developmental level (Consistent with SB200)</p>
<ol start="4">
<li>Syncope</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Syncope is Loss of consciousness that resolved without medical interventions and there was loss of postural tone (typically resolved prior to arrival of EMS)</p>
<ol start="5">
<li>Pre-syncope</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Pre-syncope is Early signs/ symptoms of syncope. It usually lasts for seconds to minutes and may be described by the patient as “nearly blacking out” or “nearly fainting” (typically resolved prior to arrival of EMS)</p>
<p><strong>II. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Assess the following:</p>
<p><strong><strong>NOTE: Full protocol has a flowchart that is reproduced in text here</strong></strong></p>
<p>Current or Recent ALOC/AMS --&gt; If trauma is suspected assess for spinal motion restriction needs. --&gt; Ongoing ALOC/AMS --&gt; Breathing adequate --&gt; Continue to Assessment and Differential Diagnosis</p>
<p>Current or Recent ALOC/AMS --&gt; If trauma is suspected assess for spinal motion restriction needs. --&gt; Ongoing ALOC/AMS --&gt; Breathing Inadequate, Assess Circulation, Support Airway/Ventilation --&gt; Pulse Present --&gt; Go to Airway/Respiratory Distress Protocol -Consider causes and differential diagnosis</p>
<p>Current or Recent ALOC/AMS --&gt; If trauma is suspected assess for spinal motion restriction needs. --&gt; Ongoing ALOC/AMS --&gt; Breathing Inadequate, Assess Circulation, Support Airway/Ventilation --&gt; Pulse Absent --&gt; Begin CPR/Proceed to Cardiac Arrest Protocols</p>
<p>Current or Recent ALOC/AMS --&gt; If trauma is suspected assess for spinal motion restriction needs. --&gt; Resolved without medical intervention --&gt;Syncope: Perform diagnostic EKG, Continue to Assessment and Differential Diagnosis</p>
<p>Feeling of oncoming decreased level of consciousness, no decrease in GCS --&gt; Pre-syncope, assess as syncope --&gt; Syncope: Perform diagnostic EKG, Continue to assessment and differential diagnosis</p>
<p><strong>III. Assessment</strong></p>
<p>A. Assessment of an ALOC/AMS patient or Syncope/Pre-Syncope Patient focuses on management of immediate needs and conducting a differential diagnosis to rule-in / rule-out potential causes.</p>
<p>B. In addition to standard assessment in accordance with SB200 Section IV. B. Assessment, consider on all patients (but not limited to):</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Stroke Assessment</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Diagnostic EKG</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Ongoing ALOC/AMS Patients</p>
<ol>
<li>Do not delay necessary resuscitation to conduct assessment.</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Syncope / Pre-Syncope Patients</p>
<ol>
<li>Cardiac issues are a common cause of Syncope / Pre-Syncope. A diagnostic EKG should be conducted even in absence of other cardiovascular symptoms. Monitoring should continue throughout care.</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Early application of Cardiac Monitor has a higher likelihood of catching an abnormal cardiac issue, cardiac monitoring and diagnostic EKG should be conducted as soon as possible.</p>
<p>Syncope / Pre-Syncope patients should be transported for evaluation even in absence of symptoms during Prehospital Care</p>
<p><strong>IV. DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS</strong></p>
<p>A. Anemia</p>
<p>B. Drugs and Alcohol</p>
<p>C. Dysrhythmias</p>
<p>D. Electrolyte Imbalance</p>
<p>E. Head Injury</p>
<p>F. Hypertension</p>
<p>G. Hyperglycemia</p>
<p>H. Hypoglycemia</p>
<p>I. Hypoxia</p>
<p>J. Infection, especially Meningitis</p>
<p>K. Myocardial Ischemia / Infarction</p>
<p>L. Pulmonary Embolism</p>
<p>M. Psychiatric</p>
<p>N. Seizure</p>
<p>O. Shock</p>
<p>P. Stroke, Intracranial Bleeding</p>
<p>Q. Toxic Ingestion</p>
<p>** Causes of Altered Level of Consciousness or Altered Mental Status may be from conditions not listed. Proper assessment and supportive care should not be limited to the following. **</p>
<p>A. <strong>Anemia</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>Assess/ treat supportively.</li>
</ol>
<p>B. <strong>Drugs and Alcohol</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>Alcohol</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Although alcohol is a common cause of altered level of consciousness, it is rarely the cause of complete unresponsiveness. Do not let the patient’s alcohol intoxication cloud your judgment. It is safer to assume that the intoxicated patient has a serious medical problem and treat accordingly than it is to conclude that the patient is “just drunk.”</p>
<p>b. Refer to M411 for treatment.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Narcotics</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Assess for signs of a possible narcotic overdose such as: pinpoint pupils, slow respirations, needle tracks or injection paraphernalia nearby.</p>
<p>b. For suspicion of narcotic overdose refer to M411.</p>
<ol start="3">
<li>Other Drugs</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Attempt to obtain the type of exposure for the patient; maintain provider safety.</p>
<p>b. Refer to M411 for treatment.</p>
<p>C. <strong>Dysrhythmia</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>Assess patient for abnormal pulse/perfusion.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<ol start="2">
<li>
<p>Place patient on cardiac monitor.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Syncope / Pre-Syncope Patients</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Obtain diagnostic EKG</p>
<p>b. Assess for:</p>
<p>• Evidence of QT prolongation (generally over 500ms)</p>
<p>• Delta waves</p>
<p>• Brugada syndrome (incomplete RBBB pattern in V1/V2 with ST segment elevation)</p>
<p>• Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy</p>
<ol start="4">
<li>Ongoing ALOC/AMS Patients</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Obtain diagnostic EKG if other cause not determined for ongoing Altered LOC.</p>
<p>b. Consider even in presence of other cause based on presentation / history.</p>
<ol start="5">
<li>If dysrhythmia or cardiovascular issues present proceed to appropriate Treatment Protocol.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>D. <strong>Electrolyte Imbalance</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>Assess for dysrhythmias and treat as appropriate.</li>
</ol>
<p>E. <strong>Head Injury</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>If suspicion of head injury refer to S501, P613 and/or SB206 for treatment.</li>
</ol>
<p>F. <strong>Hypertension</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>Symptomatic HTN (BP systolic &gt;200 and one of the following: headache, confusion, vomiting, blurred vision, chest pain, respiratory difficulty) should not be treated for the blood pressure the pre-hospital setting.</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Treat patient symptoms (vomiting, chest pain, respiratory difficulty, seizures, etc.) per the appropriate protocol.</p>
<p>b. Assess Patient for Stroke (CVA/TIA) Symptoms; assess Blood Pressure in opposite arm of initial reading.</p>
<p>c. If positive for Stroke Symptoms, refer M414 Stroke (CVA/TIA) protocol for treatment.</p>
<p>G. <strong>Hyperglycemia</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Glucose Level is greater 400 mg/dL or glucometer reads “HIGH”.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Refer to M406 or P608 for treatment.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>H. <strong>Hypoglycemia</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Glucose Level is less than 60 mg/dL or glucometer reads “LOW”.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If unable to assay Glucose Level but history leads to suspicion of hypoglycemia as cause of Altered Mental Status refer to M406 or P608 for treatment.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Refer to M406 or P608 Hyper/Hypoglycemic Protocol for treatment.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>I. <strong>Hypoxia</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Refer to SB202 for treatment.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Consider alternate causes of Hypoxia including Carbon Monoxide poisoning.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>J. <strong>Infection, especially meningitis</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Assess for fever, if capable.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Utilize appropriate level of PPE for all patients/providers/bystanders.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>K. <strong>Myocardial Ischemia / Infarction</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>ALOC/AMS may be a symptom of an Acute Cardiac Event (such as Myocardial Infarction – STEMI or Non-STEMI) even if patient does not present with “Chest Pain.” On suspicion of myocardial ischemia / infarction Refer to the M400 and perform diagnostic EKG as soon as possible (MEDIC).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Groups with Atypical AMI Presentations:</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Elderly</p>
<p>b. Females</p>
<p>c. Diabetics</p>
<p>d. Chronically Hypertensive Patients</p>
<p>L. <strong>Pulmonary Embolism</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Treat patient supportively, including oxygenation.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Limit fluid administration as possible</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>M. <strong>Psychiatric</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Rule out medical cause for ALOC/AMS using differential diagnosis.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For medically stable patients manifesting unusual behavior including violence, aggression, altered affect, or psychosis refer to M407 for treatment.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>N. <strong>Seizure</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Patient suspected to have had grand mal seizure based upon description of eyewitnesses, incontinence of urine or stool, or history of previous seizures.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient may or may not have current seizure activity.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Refer to M410 Seizure Protocol for treatment.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>O. <strong>Shock</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>Identify possible causes of shock and treat via appropriate protocols.</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Hemorrhagic Shock refer to S500 or P612 for treatment.</p>
<p>b. Cardiogenic Shock refer to M401 for treatment.</p>
<p>c. Anaphylactic Shock (Allergic Reaction) refer to M409 or P609</p>
<p>P. <strong>Stroke, Intracranial Bleeding</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Patient may NOT have altered level of consciousness.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Refer to M414 Stroke Protocol for treatment.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>Q. <strong>Toxins</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>Refer to M411 Toxicological Emergencies Protocol.</li>
</ol>

