---


---

<h1 id="guideline-for-assessment--transport-of-adult-trauma-patients">Guideline for Assessment / Transport of Adult Trauma Patients</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Evaluation of the Adult Trauma Patient - Any of these constitute a "trauma patient"</strong></p>
<p>A. Age 16 to 64 years</p>
<p>B. Physiological Criteria</p>
<ol>
<li>Significant signs of shock or evidence of poor perfusion (cold, clammy, decreased mental status, weak pulse, pallor) or:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Pulse greater than 120 or less than 50 or</p>
<p>b. Systolic blood pressure (SBP) less than 90</p>
<p>c. Absence of radial pulse when carotid pulse is present or change in pulse character.</p>
<p>d. Geriatric patients (&gt;65 years old) may be in shock with a SBP less than 110.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Airway or Breathing Difficulties or evidence of respiratory distress or failure.</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Respiratory rate of less than10 or greater than 29</p>
<p>b. Need for ventilator support.</p>
<ol start="3">
<li>Neurologic Considerations</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Evidence of Head Injury</p>
<p>i. GCS scale &lt; 13 or AVPU scale that does not respond to Pain or Unresponsive.</p>
<p>ii. Alteration in LOC during examination or thereafter; loss of conscious &gt; 5 min.</p>
<p>iii. Failure to localize pain.</p>
<p>b. Suspected spinal cord injury (paralysis due to an acute injury, sensory loss)</p>
<p>C. Anatomic Criteria</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Penetrating trauma (to head, chest or abdomen, neck, and extremities proximal to knee or elbow)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Injuries to the extremities where the following physical findings are present:</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Amputations proximal to the wrist or ankle</p>
<p>b. Visible crush injury</p>
<p>c. Fractures of two or more proximal long bones</p>
<p>d. Evidence of neurovascular compromise</p>
<ol start="3">
<li>
<p>Tension pneumothorax that is relieved (an unrelieved tension pneumothorax would fit the definition of an unstable ABC needing immediate treatment at the closest ER)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Injuries to the head, neck, or torso where the following physical findings are present:</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Visible crush injury</p>
<p>b. Abdominal tenderness, distention, or seat belt sign</p>
<p>c. Suspicion of a Pelvic fracture</p>
<p>d. Flail chest</p>
<p>e. Open skull fracture</p>
<ol start="5">
<li>
<p>Signs or symptoms of spinal cord injury.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Submersion Injuries, Strangulation &amp; Asphyxia</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Second degree or third degree burns greater than ten percent total body surface area, or other significant burns involving the face, feet, hands, genitalia, or airway.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Other Criteria/Considerations that alone do not constitute a trauma patient</p>
<ol>
<li>Significant Mechanisms of Injury Should Prompt a High Index of Suspicion</li>
</ol>
<p>a. ATV/Motorcycle crashes</p>
<p>b. Significant Falls- 20’</p>
<p>c. High Risk Auto crash</p>
<p>d. MVC Ejection.</p>
<p>e. Death in same compartment.</p>
<p>f. Auto vs. pedestrian/bicycle thrown, ran over, &gt; 20mph.</p>
<p>g. Vehicle telemetry data consistent with high risk of injury.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Age greater than 65 Should Prompt a High Index of Suspicion</li>
</ol>
<p>a. See Geriatric Specific Inclusion Criteria listed in SB209 Geriatric Trauma Patients.</p>
<ol start="3">
<li>Anticoagulation and evidence of traumatic brain injury.</li>
</ol>
<p>i. GCS scale &lt; 13 or AVPU scale that does not respond to Pain or Unresponsive.</p>
<p>ii. Alteration in LOC during examination or thereafter; loss of conscious &gt; 5 min.</p>
<p>iii. Failure to localize pain.</p>
<ol start="4">
<li>Pregnancy</li>
</ol>
<p>a. The best initial treatment of the fetus is the provision of optimal resuscitation of the mother (<strong>babies don’t do well if mothers don’t do well</strong>).</p>
<p>b. Because of their increased intravascular volume, pregnant patients can lose a significant amount of blood before tachycardia, hypotension, and other signs of hypovolemia occur.</p>
<p>c. The highest incidence of <strong>fetal deaths occurs secondary to severe maternal shock</strong>, which is associated with a fetal mortality rate of 80%.</p>
<p>d. The fetus may be in distress and the placenta deprived of vital perfusion while the mother’s condition and vital signs appear stable.</p>
<p>e. Oxygen supplementation should be given to <strong>maintain maternal oxygen saturation &gt;95%</strong> to ensure adequate fetal oxygenation.</p>
<p>f. Because of their adverse effect on utero-placental perfusion, vasopressors in pregnant women should be used only for intractable hypotension that is unresponsive to fluid resuscitation.</p>
<p>g. After mid-pregnancy, the gravid uterus should be moved off the inferior vena cava to increase venous return and cardiac output in the acutely injured pregnant woman. This may be achieved by <strong>manual displacement of the uterus or left lateral tilt (30°)</strong>. Care should be taken to secure the spinal cord when using left lateral tilt.</p>
<p>h. Fetal loss can occur even when the mother has incurred no abdominal injuries.</p>
<p>i. In a case-by-case analysis, severe injuries are MUCH more likely to result in fetal loss. However, because there is a much higher frequency of minor trauma during pregnancy most fetal losses due to trauma result from minor maternal injury mechanisms.</p>
<p>j. Intubation is more difficult with failed intubations 8x more likely. <strong>A smaller size ET Tube is recommended</strong>.</p>
<p>k. Insertion of <strong>2 large bore IV’s is recommended for all seriously injured pregnant trauma patients</strong> to facilitate initial rapid crystalloid infusion, intravascular volume expansion, and possible further blood transfusion as required.</p>
<p>l. <strong>Avoid distractions</strong> and avoid the urge to focus on the fetus.</p>
<p>m. Every woman who sustains trauma should be questioned specifically about domestic or intimate partner violence.</p>
<p>n. Call medical control if any questions. <strong>Notify receiving hospital</strong>.</p>
<p><strong>II. Transportation of the Adult Trauma Patient</strong></p>
<p>A. Ground Transportation Time Guidelines</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>30 minutes or less from a Trauma Center → TRAUMA CENTER (excluding uncontrolled airway or traumatic CPR)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Greater than 30 minutes to a trauma center → may consider nearest appropriate facility.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Ground Transportation Guidelines</p>
<ol>
<li>Patients should be transported to the nearest appropriate facility if any of the following exists:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Airway is unstable and cannot be controlled/managed by conventional methods</p>
<p>b. Potential for unstable airway, i.e., (facial/upper torso burn)</p>
<p>c. Blunt trauma arrest (no pulses or respirations) if indicated per S509.</p>
<p>d. Patient does “NOT” meet criteria for a trauma patient as defined above.</p>
<p>*** Pre-arrival notification of the receiving facility is essential!!! ***</p>
<p>C. Air Medical Transportation</p>
<ol>
<li>General principles:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Prolonged delays at the scene waiting for air medical transport should be avoided.</p>
<p>b. If air medical transportation is unavailable (e.g., weather conditions), patient should be transported by ground guidelines as listed above.</p>
<p>c. Air transport, if dispatched to the scene, should be diverted to the hospital if the patient appeared appropriate for air transport but the decision was made to transport to the nearest facility (non-trauma center) in the interim.</p>
<p>d. Air Medical Programs share the responsibility to educate EMS units and facilities on appropriate triage. They should also institute an active utilization and quality review program that provides feedback to EMS units.</p>
<p>e. Patients with uncontrolled ABCs should be taken to the closest appropriate facility (24-hour emergency department) if that can be achieved prior to the arrival of air medical transport.</p>
<p>f. Traumatic cardiac arrest due to blunt trauma is not appropriate for air transport.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Reasons to Consider a Call for Air Transport:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Prolonged extrication</p>
<p>b. Multiple victims/trauma patients</p>
<p>c. Time/distance factors:</p>
<p>i. If the transportation time to a trauma center by ground is greater than 30 minutes AND the transport time by ground to the nearest trauma center is greater than the total transport time** to a trauma center by helicopter.</p>
<p>ii. **Total transport time includes any time at scene waiting for helicopter and transport time to trauma center.</p>
<p>iii. In the rural environment, immediate transfer with severely traumatized patients by air medical transport may be appropriate and should be encouraged if it does not significantly delay intervention for immediate life-threatening injuries.</p>
<p><strong>NOTES:</strong></p>
<p>A. Exceptions to these Trauma Triage Guidelines are listed in the Trauma Patient Assessment and Transport Guidelines Protocol SB206 under Section VI. These same exceptions apply to pediatric, adult, and geriatric trauma patients.</p>

