---


---

<h1 id="clinical-practice-standards-for-emergency-medical-services">Clinical Practice Standards for Emergency Medical Services</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Purpose</strong></p>
<p>A. To establish a systematic procedure for the handling of emergency medical calls to improve patient care of patients of all ages.</p>
<p>B. To ensure the proper and systematic documentation of EMS calls.</p>
<p><strong>II. Protocol Specific Definitions</strong></p>
<p>A. Incident – a dispatch of 911 resources to a location by a person or third party. This should be documented as per individual departmental policies.</p>
<ol>
<li>No Incident Found on Arrival – is defined as an incident that after being dispatched, the crews arrive on scene and find that there was no incident or reason for them to be there, i.e., a person was reported to be injured from a fall but was gone upon arrival of EMS.</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Patient – any person satisfying the definition of “Patient” in A113.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>A pediatric patient is referred to as a patient younger than 16 years of age.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>An adult patient is referred to as a patient 16 years and older.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>A geriatrics patient is referred to as a patient 65 years and older.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>No patient contact – is defined as a disregard by the requesting person or agency or an incident that EMS responds to and the patient or would be patient is gone upon arrival, i.e., EMS responds to a motor vehicle crash, where it is evident that someone was injured, but they are no longer on the scene.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Intoxicated – any person presenting with diminished physical or mental control or diminished ability to make decisions by reason of the influence of alcohol liquor, drugs, or other substance.</p>
<p>D. Patient Care Report (PCR) – this is the form (either electronic or manual) that documents the assessment and medical care provided to a patient.</p>
<p><strong>III. Scope</strong></p>
<p>A. This protocol shall apply to all departments utilizing these medical protocols to render medical care.</p>
<p><strong>IV. Policy</strong></p>
<p>A. <strong>Responsibility:</strong> It is the responsibility of the member with the highest level of medical training at the scene to guide the medical decisions regarding patient care and transportation. Refer to A104 Control of Emergency Medical Services at Scene of Emergency (with a physician on scene).</p>
<p>B. <strong>Assessment:</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>All subjects identified as a patient as defined above will be assessed using criteria consistent with the provider’s level of training. This will include but is not limited to the following:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Vital Signs – A complete set of vital signs will be assessed. This shall include evaluating blood pressure, pulse rate, respiratory rate, and pulse oximetry reading.</p>
<p>i. Stable patients should have at least two sets of pertinent vital signs. Ideally, one set should be taken shortly before arrival at receiving facility.</p>
<p>ii. Critical patients should have pertinent vital signs frequently monitored.</p>
<p>b. Mental Status – all patients will be evaluated to establish the patient’s level of consciousness (alert and oriented to person, place, time, and situation). The mental status of non-verbal pediatric patients should be assessed using the AVPU method within the context of the expected developmental level. Patients presenting with an altered mental status or level of consciousness shall have their blood glucose evaluated and documented.</p>
<p>c. History of present illness/injury.</p>
<p>d. History/Medications/Allergies – obtain patients past medical history, current medications, and any allergies to medications.</p>
<p>e. Focused assessment/physical examination as described by the standard national EMT/Paramedic curriculum to include all pertinent positive or pertinent negative symptoms.</p>
<p>C. <strong>Treatment:</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>All patients assessed by EMS personnel will be treated as directed by the protocols contained herein. Based on the initial patient history of the presenting illness and physical exam, EMS personnel should apply the most appropriate medical protocol.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Appropriate body substance isolation precautions should be taken.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>All patients regardless of age should be kept from eating or drinking anything during prehospital evaluation and transport. This aims to decrease the risk a patient will vomit and aspirate prior to arriving to the hospital. The following exceptions should be noted, however:</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Awake and alert patients who require their regularly scheduled oral medications.</p>
<p>b. Other patients as directed specifically in the Academy of Medicine of Cincinnati Protocols.</p>
<ol start="4">
<li>Maintain Airway</li>
</ol>
<p>a. If the patient is in impending respiratory failure, follow the Airway Protocol T705.</p>
<ol start="5">
<li>
<p>Administer oxygen if appropriate for condition.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Establish IV if indicated or in patients who are at risk for clinical deterioration.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Apply appropriate monitoring equipment and if available; this may include:</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Continuous pulse oximetry</p>
<p>b. Cardiac rhythm monitoring</p>
<p>c. Waveform capnography</p>
<ol start="8">
<li>EMT’s should request ALS back-up or intercept if they feel the patient’s condition and needs exceed or may exceed their level of care.</li>
</ol>
<p>D. <strong>Communication with the Emergency Department</strong> – refer to A101 Prehospital Communication.</p>
<p>E. <strong>Documentation</strong>: The Patient Care Report (PCR) is a legal document of the medical assessment and treatment of the patient. All aspects of the patient’s medical assessment, treatment and transportation will be documented in the PCR. Each EMS unit that interacts with the patient shall complete a PCR on that patient.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Member completing the PCR will sign the form as a medical document.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Activities performed by any person involved with the patients’ care will be documented on the PCR.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>All patients will, as a minimum, have assessment criteria documented as in Section B-1 above. If assessment criteria are not obtained, documentation supporting the inability to gather an assessment will be included.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>All records of cardiac rhythms (including cardiac monitor and AED tracings) should be collected and archived as part of the patient record.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If the incident is determined to be a No Patient Contact or a No Incident Found on Arrival, the EMS crew shall document the incident appropriately based on their departmental policies.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>F. <strong>Responsibilities at the Emergency Department</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Provide verbal report to appropriate ED personnel.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Provide access to a copy of the completed PCR.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<blockquote>
<p>Written with <a href="https://stackedit.io/">StackEdit</a>.</p>
</blockquote>

