---


---

<h1 id="trauma-patient-assessment-and-transport-guidelines">Trauma Patient Assessment and Transport Guidelines</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Introduction</strong></p>
<p>A. The goal of any trauma patient assessment and transportation guideline is to facilitate "whatever gets the patient to the most appropriate level of care in the most expeditious manner.” There is strong evidence that shows that reducing the time interval from the moment of injury to delivery/arrival at a definitive care site will reduce morbidity and mortality.</p>
<p>B. These guidelines were developed to assist the emergency responder to determine what constitutes a trauma patient and where to transport the trauma patient.</p>
<p>C. In the prehospital care environment, time, distance, patient condition, and level of care are important variables when making decisions for transporting the trauma patient. These variables are frequently hard to assess in the field and are ever changing. These guidelines are meant to supplement, but not replace the judgment of the on-scene Medic/EMT.</p>
<p>D. <em>The Tri-state Trauma Coalition encourages all Fire and EMS Agencies and their personnel to review the Trauma Patient Assessment and Transportation guidelines on an annual basis.</em></p>
<p>E. <em>The</em> <em>Ohio Prehospital Trauma Triage Decision Tree SB210</em> <em>may be used as an aide in determining the appropriate facility for the patient.</em></p>
<p><strong>II. Concepts</strong></p>
<p>A. Rapid field evaluation, treatment, and transport are vital to the overall outcome of the trauma patient. After the trauma patient’s extrication, the on-scene time should be limited to TEN MINUTES or less, except when there are extenuating circumstances.</p>
<p>B. Trauma Center means a facility with a current A.C.S. verification certificate, or a hospital meeting A.C.S. guidelines with a known A.C.S. verification in process. *</p>
<p>C. Use of on-line, active medical control for medical direction in the field, particularly for difficult cases, is encouraged.</p>
<p> Pre-arrival notification of the receiving facility is essential! <strong>Use EXACT phrase “Trauma Alert”</strong></p>
<p><strong>III. Trauma Center/Facility Capabilities:</strong> The Regional Trauma Plan is an inclusive model that integrates the resources of all facilities throughout the region in providing care to the severely injured trauma patient.</p>
<p>A. Level I and II Trauma Centers offer the same level of care for the incoming trauma patient and may be used interchangeably.</p>
<p>B. Level III Trauma Centers offer services, based on individual hospital resources that provide for initial assessment, resuscitation, and stabilization, which may include emergency surgery, for the trauma patient.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>The Level III Trauma Center will have established Transfer Agreements with the NEAREST Level I and II Trauma Centers in the region.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>In the areas of the region where the Level III Trauma Center is the only verified trauma facility, (within 30 minutes ground transport time), this hospital will act as the primary receiving facility for the critically injured patient.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p><em>In areas where the trauma patient is in close proximity to a Level III trauma center and a Level I or II trauma center is still within the 30 minute transport guidelines established in this document, the EMS Provider should exercise professional judgment as to whether the patient would benefit more from an immediate evaluation and stabilization at the proximate Level III trauma center or from direct transport by ground EMS Provider or air to the Level I or II trauma center.</em></p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Other general acute care hospitals not verified/designated as Trauma Centers, but having 24- hour Emergency Department capabilities, can and should be used in certain situations to stabilize the “critically injured” trauma patient. In areas of the region where there are no verified Trauma Centers (within 30-minute ground transport time) the general acute care hospital will act as the primary receiving facility for all critically injured trauma patients. (See air medical utilization guidelines).</p>
<p>D. <em>The general acute care hospital will have established Transfer Agreements with the NEAREST Level I and II Trauma Centers in the Region</em></p>
<p>E. The pediatric trauma patient should be transported to the NEAREST Pediatric Trauma Center!</p>
<p>F. All pregnant trauma patients should be transported to the NEAREST Adult Trauma Center regardless of where they are supposed to deliver.</p>
<p><strong>IV. Use of Guidelines</strong></p>
<p>A. Determine if the patient qualifies as a trauma patient.</p>
<ol>
<li>Note the differences in inclusion criteria for Pediatric (younger than 16 years) Adult (16-65 yrs.), and Geriatric (greater than 65 yrs.).</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Determine where and how the trauma patient is to be transported.</p>
<p>C. Go to the appropriate facility.</p>
<p><strong>V. Hospital / Inter-Hospital Transfer of Trauma Patients</strong></p>
<p>A. Written protocols and agreements between facilities for transport/transfer of trauma patients are required.</p>
<p>B. EMS and local facility should have active discussion regarding each other’s capabilities.</p>
<p>C. The ED Capability Study may be used as a resource.</p>
<p>D. The Division of EMS posts on the Internet the list of trauma centers recognized by the Ohio Department of Public Safety and the Ohio Department of Health</p>
<p><strong>VI. Exceptions:</strong></p>
<p>A. Emergency medical service personnel shall transport a trauma victim, as defined in section 4765-14-01 of the Revised Code, directly to an adult or pediatric trauma center that is qualified to provide appropriate adult or pediatric care, unless one or more of the following exceptions apply:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>It is medically necessary to transport the victim to another hospital for initial assessment and stabilization before transfer to an adult or pediatric trauma center.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>It is unsafe or medically inappropriate to transport the victim directly to an adult or pediatric trauma center due to adverse weather or ground conditions or excessive transport time.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Transporting the victim to an adult or pediatric trauma center would cause a shortage of local emergency medical service resources.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>No appropriate adult or pediatric trauma center is able to receive and provide adult or pediatric trauma care to the trauma victim without undue delay.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Before transport of a patient begins, the patient requests to be taken to a particular hospital that is not a trauma center or, if the patient is less than eighteen years of age or is not able to communicate, such a request is made by an adult member of the patient’s family or a legal representative of the patient.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. If the state trauma triage protocols are amended to include criteria that do not appear in a region’s (or organization’s) protocols, such amendments will automatically be applied to the region’s protocols until such time as the region amends their protocols, in accordance with section 4765.40 of the Revised Code.</p>
<p>B. The American College of Surgeons (ACS) Trauma Center Verification guidelines describe a range of clinical services that might be offered by Level II and level III trauma centers (for example – Level III trauma centers are not required to have neurosurgery or thoracic surgery, although a number of Level III centers may have these clinical services available). Information on how to obtain a copy of the Resources for Optimal Care of the Injured Patient: 2014 (ACS trauma center standards) can be found at <a href="https://www.facs.org/quality-programs/trauma/tqp/center-programs/vrc/resources">https://www.facs.org/quality-programs/trauma/tqp/center-programs/vrc/resources</a>. This information was taken from the State of Ohio’s Document “What EMS Providers Should Know about Trauma Triage.”</p>
<p>C. Protocol SB210 is a document that EMS providers may find helpful with deciding who needs to be transported directly to a trauma center. Based on Ohio’s trauma triage criteria, this form was developed by the Academy of Medicine of Cincinnati SW Ohio Protocol Subcommittee and was approved by the State EMS Board for use by EMS personnel in the prehospital setting.</p>
<h2 id="ky-all">KY-ALL</h2>
<p>I. Purpose</p>
<p>A. Victims of major trauma have better outcomes when transported to a designated trauma center in a timely manner. The American College of Surgeons (ACS) has developed triage criteria that is useful in identifying patients that may benefit from evaluation at a trauma center.</p>
<p>B. In general consider the following guidelines:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>It is in the best interest of the patient to be transported to a designated trauma center if the patient meets ACS criteria and a designated trauma center is within thirty minutes transport time.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patients with a compromised airway may be best served by transport to the closest hospital with rapid transfer to a trauma center.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Consider air medical resources but do not delay transport unnecessarily. (See Helicopter Criteria for Scene Transport.)</p>
</li>
</ol>

