---


---

<h1 id="hypotension--shock">Hypotension / Shock</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Purpose</strong></p>
<p>A. Hypotension (low blood pressure) is a condition that if not addressed can lead to circulatory shock, a state of inadequate tissue perfusion. Shock can cause multi-organ failure and eventually death. There are four main categories of shock, and they have specific causes:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Hypovolemic shock can be caused by blood loss (hemorrhage), third spacing of fluid (pancreatitis, ascites), or fluid loss (vomiting, diarrhea, burns, sweating).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Cardiogenic shock can be secondary to myocardial infarction, arrhythmias, valvular disease, or cardiomyopathy.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Obstructive shock is caused by pulmonary embolism, pericardial tamponade, or tension pneumothorax.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Distributive shock by sepsis, anaphylaxis, neurogenic or adrenal crisis.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Hypotension Caveats</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Not all hypotension will lead to shock and not all hypotension needs to be treated in the field.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Allowing a patient to have hypotension during resuscitation has been shown to improve outcome in some forms of trauma.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Not all forms of hypotension can be treated with fluids, and some may be made worse with fluid administration.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Level of consciousness and pulse character and/or presence can help determine if the patient is hypotensive or in shock.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If the patient is thought to be in shock and the cause is known, then the appropriate treatment should be started.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>In an adrenal insufficiency patient, hypotension/shock can be signs of adrenal crisis. See M417.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>II. Treatment of hypotension depends on the type and whether shock is present or not</strong></p>
<p>A. <strong>Hypovolemic shock</strong> (see S500 or P614 Hemorrhagic Shock with/without suspected head injury)</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>With ongoing bleeding, should be treated if the mental status deteriorates (in the absence of head trauma) or the pulse is lost.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Without bleeding or with controlled bleeding (fluid loss secondary to vomiting, &gt;20% burns or amputation with a tourniquet in place) shock can be treated with crystalloid, colloid, or blood products. Elevating the legs can predict whether the blood pressure will respond to fluids. If the pressure increases, then fluids can be given as a bolus.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>B. <strong>Cardiogenic shock</strong> – (see M401 Cardiogenic Shock)</p>
<ol>
<li>Treat with vasopressor drugs such as push dose epinephrine. The dose should be titrated to clinical effect. These agents increase blood pressure (increase heart rate, contractility, and systemic vascular resistance) but also increase the risk for tachyarrhythmias.</li>
</ol>
<p>C. <strong>Obstructive shock</strong> from cardiac tamponade or pulmonary embolus may respond to a fluid bolus but the underlying cause must be addressed. Push dose epinephrine may maintain blood pressure but are not ideal drugs for this condition.</p>
<p>D. <strong>Distributive shock</strong> from anaphylaxis (see M409 or P609 Anaphylaxis Protocol), neurogenic, or septic shock can be treated with a fluid bolus and then push dose epinephrine.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Septic shock (see M419 Sepsis) is the most common type of distributive shock and one of the most common types of shock overall. Sepsis is a deadly condition caused by a body’s response to infection. It is critical for providers to suspect the presence of sepsis in any patient who is at high risk for infection regardless of vital signs. Patients may be in septic shock with a normal blood pressure. The key to improve patient outcomes in septic shock is early recognition of sepsis, IV fluid resuscitation, O2 therapy, and alerting the receiving hospital staff.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Septic shock is very difficult to identify. Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome (SIRS) criteria can be used to help identify patients before hypotension develops:</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Temp &gt;38°C (100.4°F) or &lt; 36°C (96.8°F)</p>
<p>b. Elevated Heart Rate</p>
<p>c. Elevated Respiratory Rate or PaCO2 &lt; 32 mm Hg</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>III. Push Dose Epinephrine</strong></p>
<p>A. Inclusion Criteria</p>
<ol>
<li>All ages.</li>
</ol>
<p>B. See mixing recommendations below.</p>
<p>C. Dose:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Adult: 0.5-2 ml of a 10mcg/ml solution every 2-5 minutes (5-20 mcg)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Pediatric: 1mcg/kg (0.1mL/kg) of 10mcg/ml solution every 2-5 minutes (Max of 20mcg every 2-4 min)</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>Mixing push dose epinephrine</p>
<p>A. Method 1</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Take a 10 ml syringe with 9 ml of normal saline.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Into this syringe, draw up 1 ml of epinephrine (0.1 mg/mL)</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. This can be drawn up using a needle or stopcock.</p>
<ol start="3">
<li>Now you have 10 mls of Epinephrine 10 mcg/ml.</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Method 2</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Withdraw 10ml of normal saline from a 100 ml bag and discard.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Inject 1 mg of epinephrine (0.1 mg/mL) into 100ml bag of normal saline.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Withdraw 10 ml of solution.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Now you have 10 mls of Epinephrine 10 mcg/ml.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Method 3</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Inject 1ml of 1 mg/ml epinephrine into 100ml normal saline.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Withdraw 10 ml of solution.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Now you have 10 mls of Epinephrine 10 mcg/ml.</p>
</li>
</ol>

