---


---

<h1 id="guideline-for-assessment--transport-of-geriatric-trauma-patients">Guideline for Assessment / Transport of Geriatric Trauma Patients</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Trauma patients greater than 65 years of age should be defined as geriatric trauma.</strong></p>
<p>A. The criteria listed below are in addition to the Adult Trauma Triage Guidelines. Geriatric trauma patients should be triaged for evaluation in a trauma center for:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Glasgow Coma Score less than or equal to 14 with known or suspected traumatic brain injury.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Systolic blood pressure less than 110 mmHg or pulse greater than 90.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Falls with from any height, including standing falls, with evidence of traumatic brain injury.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Pedestrian struck by motor vehicle.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Known or suspected proximal long bone fracture sustained in a motor vehicle crash.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Injury sustained in two or more body regions.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Anticoagulation and evidence of traumatic brain injury.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. GCS scale &lt; 13 or AVPU scale that does not respond to Pain or Unresponsive.</p>
<p>b. Alteration in LOC during examination or thereafter; loss of conscious &gt; 5 min.</p>
<p>c. Failure to localize pain.</p>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. Geriatric trauma patients should be given special consideration for evaluation at a trauma center if they have diabetes, cardiac disease, congestive heart failure, CVA, pulmonary disease (COPD), clotting disorder (including anticoagulants), immunosuppressive disorder (i.e., <em>HIV/AIDS, Organ Transplant, Chemotherapy, Long-term use of corticosteroids, etc)__,</em> or require dialysis.</p>
<p>B. The geriatric trauma recommendations were taken from the Geriatric Trauma Task Force report released in December of 2007 by the State of Ohio Board of Emergency Medical Services, Trauma Committee. The data used to make these recommendations came directly from the Ohio Trauma EMS Registry. Supplemental data from the CDC /MMWR Guidelines for Field Triage of Injured Patients, January 2012.</p>
<p>C. Exceptions to these Trauma Triage Guidelines are listed in the Trauma Patient Assessment and Transport Guidelines Protocol SB206 under Section VI. These same exceptions apply to pediatric, adult, and geriatric trauma patients.</p>

