---


---

<h1 id="cardiac-arrest">Cardiac Arrest</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. I****NCLUSION</strong> <strong>C****RITERIA</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient of any age (except newborn)</p>
<p>B. No pulse</p>
<p><strong>II. D****IFFERENTIAL</strong> <strong>D****IAGNOSIS</strong> <strong>(H’S AND T’S)</strong></p>
<p>A. Potential causes should be considered and treated via the appropriate protocol simultaneously with Cardiac Arrest:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Hypovolemia</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Hypoxia</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Hydrogen Ion (Acidosis)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Hypo/Hyperkalemia</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Hypothermia</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Toxins (Drug Overdose)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Tamponade (Cardiac)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Tension Pneumothorax</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Thrombus (Cardiac or Pulmonary)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Trauma</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>III. PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p>A. If Traumatic Cardiac Arrest, go to Protocol S509.</p>
<p>B. Initiate high-quality CPR with minimal interruptions.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Begin the performance of 5 cycles (approximately 2 minutes) of CPR.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Ensure that high-quality CPR is being performed with adequate compressions.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Rotate compressors every 2 minutes to maintain high quality compressions.</p>
<p>b. Push hard (&gt;2 inches in adults, or &gt;1/3 chest diameter in pediatrics)</p>
<p>c. Push fast (100-120/minute)</p>
<p>d. Allow for chest recoil with each compression.</p>
<p>e. Minimize interruptions in compressions.</p>
<p>C. Provide good ventilations.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Manage the airway per Protocol T705.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Ventilate SLOWLY with each breath over 1 second.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Monitor End Tidal CO2 throughout care</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Use supplemental oxygen flow rate &gt;10 L/minute when available.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Avoid excessive ventilations.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Give a sufficient tidal volume to produce visible chest rise.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Without an Advanced Airway, ventilations may be performed either:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Adults: 30:2 ratio with compressions, OR asynchronous to compressions at 10/minute</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Pediatrics: 15:2 ratio with compressions (30:2 if only one rescuer)</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>E. Upon placement of an Advanced Airway, compressions may occur without pauses for ventilation.</p>
<ol>
<li>Ventilate at 10/minute. *See Note E.</li>
</ol>
<p>F. Continue resuscitation in 2-minute cycles of CPR, brief pulse/rhythm check, and defibrillation (if indicated) until either Return of Spontaneous Circulation occurs, or Termination of Resuscitation criteria are met.</p>
<p>G. Do not delay the use of an AED or Defibrillator. Use them as soon as they are available.</p>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<p>H. If available, request ALS back-up.</p>
<p>I. Apply AED and follow audio instructions.</p>
<p>J. If “Deliver Shock” is advised at any time by the AED, clear all people from the patient and shock.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Immediately resume CPR for 2 minutes before another pulse or rhythm check is performed.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Continue providing CPR per SB204 and following AED Instructions until transport or ALS care arrives.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Refer to age-appropriate VF/VT Protocol C300 or P601 for additional information.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>K. If “No shock” is advised, check pulse.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>If pulse is present, assess patient and provide post-ROSC care.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If pulse is absent:</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Immediately resume CPR for 2 minutes before another pulse or rhythm check is performed.</p>
<p>b. Continue providing CPR per SB204 and following AED Instructions until transport or ALS care arrives.</p>
<p>c. Refer to age-appropriate PEA/Asystole Protocol C301 or P602 for additional information.</p>
<p>L. Special Transport Considerations</p>
<ol>
<li>BLS transport unit on the scene with ALS resources responding, but not yet on the scene.</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Continue care as outlined in protocol.</p>
<p>b. If ALS resources will be delayed more than 10 minutes, proceed with transport, and arrange to intercept the ALS unit, if possible.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>No ALS resources responding or available.</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Continue care as outlined in protocol.</p>
<p>b. Perform at least 10 cycles of CPR (20 minutes) on scene before moving to BLS transport unit.</p>
<p>M. If the patient has been successfully defibrillated (has a pulse) and then re-arrests, continue with rhythm analysis and follow directions of the AED for “Deliver Shock” or “No Shock” advisories.</p>
<p>N. The AED is to remain attached to the patient and left in the “on” position during the entire management of the patient, unless stated otherwise by the manufacturer’s instructions.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>O. Apply quick look paddles or pads if not already monitored. Do this IMMEDIATELY if arrest is witnessed by EMS or bystander CPR is in progress upon arrival.</p>
<p>P. Establish vascular access while continuing CPR and rhythm specific care.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>IV access is preferred, and it is recommended to attempt IV access for drug administration.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>IO access should be attempted if IV access is unsuccessful OR not feasible.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>Q. During rhythm specific care, perform CPR for 2 minutes before another pulse or rhythm check is done.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Continue cycles of CPR throughout treatment.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Chest compressions should be interrupted for as short of a time period as possible.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Conduct brief pulse/rhythm checks after every cycle.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Deliver defibrillations at end of every cycle if rhythm remains shockable.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Defibrillators should be charged during CPR, with defibrillation delivered only when safe.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>R. If VF/VT, proceed to age-appropriate VF/VT Protocol C300 or P601.</p>
<p>S. If PEA/Asystole, proceed to age-appropriate PEA/Asystole Protocol C301 or P602.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>NOTES:</strong></p>
<p>A. For High Quality CPR:</p>
<ol>
<li>The 5 components of high-quality CPR are:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Ensuring chest compressions of adequate rate</p>
<p>b. Ensuring chest compressions of adequate depth</p>
<p>c. Allowing full chest recoil between compressions</p>
<p>d. Minimizing interruptions in chest compressions</p>
<p>e. Avoiding excessive ventilation</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>In order to maintain high quality compressions, the person doing compressions should consider change with either every 2-minute cycle or when end tidal CO2 goes down.</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Given the time-sensitive nature of cardiac arrest, treatment is most effective when performed ON SCENE. Except when noted in this protocol, transportation to an Emergency Department should be delayed.</p>
<p>C. Whenever possible, provide family members with the option of being present during resuscitation.</p>
<ol>
<li>If the presence of family members creates undue staff stress or is considered detrimental to the resuscitation, then family members should be respectfully asked to leave.</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Literature indicates that the use of a mechanical “thumper” is not superior to high quality compressions by a sufficient number of rescuers.</p>
<p>E. When performing CPR in infants and children with an advanced airway, it may be reasonable to target a respiratory rate range of 1 breath every 2–3 s (20–30 breaths/min), accounting for age and clinical condition. Rates exceeding these recommendations may compromise hemodynamics.</p>
<ol>
<li>This is based on one small, multicenter observational study of intubated pediatric patients found that ventilation rates (at least 30 breaths/min in children less than 1 year of age, at  least 25 breaths/min in older children) were associated with improved rates of ROSC and survival.1 However, increasing ventilation rates are associated with decreased systolic blood pressure in children. The optimum ventilation rate during continuous chest compressions in children with an advanced airway is based on limited data and requires further study.</li>
</ol>
<p>F. In the setting of an adult submersion injury, no change to the resuscitation is required.</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>G. In the setting of adrenal insufficiency, resuscitation efforts may be unsuccessful without the administration of steroids. See M417.</p>
<p>H. In the setting of hypothermia refer to M412: Hypothermia.</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p>I. In the setting of CPR-Induced Consciousness:</p>
<ol>
<li>Patient may show signs of awareness during cardiac arrest that may interfere with CPR such as but not limited to:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Extremity movement</p>
<p>b. Attempting to rise</p>
<p>c. Purposeful movements</p>
<p>d. Gag reflex</p>
<p>e. Vocalizing distress</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>
<p>Continue providing high-quality CPR despite consciousness, maintaining a minimization in interruptions, adequate compressions and ventilation, and defibrillation.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Once CPR-IC is diagnosed, continue with 2-minute cycles and do not stop mid-cycle to confirm. Care must be taken to ensure this reaction is the result of CPR-Induced Consciousness. Confirmation occurs when a loss of consciousness/cognitive function occurs during breaks in compressions and/or Asystole is confirmed on the ECG.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>J. Physical restraints may be necessary and should be accompanied by chemical restraint.</p>
<h2 id="medic-2">Medic</h2>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Consider administration of Midazolam (Versed) 2-5 mg IV/IO every 10 minutes as necessary to provide sedation if CPR-IC interferes with CPR.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Maintain cardiac monitoring and airway management includes SpO2 and ETCO2 monitoring.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-3">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>NOTES:</strong></p>
<p>A. CPR-Induced Consciousness is an increasingly frequent phenomenon that is most often associated with:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Minimal downtime</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>High Quality CPR</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>CPR performed by an external mechanical compression device</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Studies have shown that CPR-IC is mostly associated with increased neurological function and high rate of neurologically intact survival.</p>
<p>C. CPR-IC is most commonly linked to amnesia of the event post-ROSC and most patients do not remember the encounter. However, some patients do recall, and this must be considered while treating the patient.</p>
<p>D. CPR-IC can be extremely distressing for both the patient and the crew. Management of the interference is beneficial for all involved.</p>
<p>1 Sutton RM, Reeder RW, Landis WP, Meert KL, Yates AR, Morgan RW, Berger JT, Newth CJ, Carcillo JA, McQuillen PS, Harrison RE, Moler FW, Pollack MM, Carpenter TC, Notterman DA, Holubkov R, Dean JM, Nadkarni VM, Berg RA; Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Collaborative Pediatric Critical Care Research Network (CPCCRN). Ventilation Rates and Pediatric In-Hospital Cardiac Arrest Survival Outcomes. Crit Care Med. 2019;47:1627–1636. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000003898</p>

