---


---

<h1 id="guideline-for-assessment--transport-of-pediatric-trauma-16-yrs.">Guideline for Assessment / Transport of Pediatric Trauma &lt;16 yrs.</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Evaluation of the Pediatric Trauma Patient: age is younger than 16 years old</strong></p>
<p>A. Physiological Criteria</p>
<ol>
<li>Significant signs of shock or evidence of poor perfusion (cold, clammy, decreased mental status, weak pulse, pallor) or:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Tachycardia or bradycardia</p>
<p>b. Hypotension</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Airway/Breathing difficulties; Evidence of respiratory distress or failure, including:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Intubated patient</p>
<p>b. Tachypnea</p>
<p>c. Stridor</p>
<p>d. Hoarse voice or difficulty speaking</p>
<p>e. Significant grunting, retractions</p>
<p>f. Respiratory rate less than 20 in infants less than 1 year old</p>
<p>g. Cyanosis or need for supplemental oxygen.</p>
<p>h. Unable to maintain or difficult airway.</p>
<ol start="3">
<li>Neurologic considerations</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Evidence of head injury</p>
<p>i. Glasgow Coma Scale less than or equal to 13 or AVPU scale that does not respond to Pain or Unresponsive.</p>
<p>ii. Alteration in LOC during examination or thereafter; loss of conscious greater than 5 minutes</p>
<p>iii. Failure to localize pain.</p>
<p>b. Suspected spinal cord injury (paralysis or alteration in sensation)</p>
<p>B. Anatomic Criteria</p>
<ol>
<li>Penetrating trauma (to the head, chest or abdomen, neck, including groin and buttocks)</li>
</ol>
<p>a. GSW proximal to the knee and elbow.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Injuries to the extremities where the following physical findings are present:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Amputations proximal to the wrist or ankle</p>
<p>b. Visible crush injury</p>
<p>c. Fractures of two or more proximal long bones</p>
<p>d. Evidence of neurovascular compromise</p>
<ol start="3">
<li>
<p>Tension pneumothorax which is relieved (an unrelieved tension pneumothorax would fit the definition of an unstable ABC, needing immediate treatment at the closes ER)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Injuries to the head, neck or torso where the following physical findings are present:</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Visible crush injury</p>
<p>b. Abdominal tenderness, distention, or seat belt sign</p>
<p>c. Suspicion of a pelvic fracture.</p>
<p>d. Flail chest</p>
<ol start="5">
<li>
<p>Signs or symptoms of spinal cord injury.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Submersion injury, Strangulation and Asphyxia.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Full thickness or partial thickness greater than ten percent total body surface area, or other significant burns involving the face, feet, hands, genitalia, or airway. 1st degree burns are not calculated in TBSA.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Other Criteria/Considerations that alone do not CONSTITUTE A Pediatric trauma patient:</p>
<ol>
<li>Significant mechanism of injury should prompt a high index of suspicion and should be considered in the evaluation. Mechanisms particularly dangerous for pediatric patients include:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Improperly restrained child in MVC (airbag injuries included)</p>
<p>b. ATV/Motorcycle crashes</p>
<p>c. Significant Falls- 10’ or 2 to 3 times body height</p>
<p>d. High Risk Auto crash</p>
<p>e. MVC with Ejection.</p>
<p>f. Death in same compartment.</p>
<p>g. Auto vs. pedestrian/bicycle thrown, ran over, greater than 20mph.</p>
<p>h. Vehicle telemetry data consistent with high risk of injury.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Special situations that may require the resources of a pediatric trauma center.</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Congenital defects</p>
<p>b. Suspected Child Abuse</p>
<p>c. Chronic respiratory illness</p>
<p>d. Diabetes</p>
<p>e. Bleeding disorder or anticoagulants</p>
<p>f. Immuno-suppressed patients (i.e., patients with cancer, organ transplant patients, HIV/AIDS, long-term use of corticosteroids, etc.)</p>
<p>*****Pre-arrival notification to the receiving facility is essential! *****</p>
<p><strong>II. Transportation of the Pediatric trauma patient:</strong></p>
<p>A. Ground transportation guidelines – time considerations</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>30 minutes or less from a Pediatric Trauma Center (excluding uncontrolled airway or traumatic arrest): Transport to a Pediatric Trauma Center</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Greater than 30 minutes to a Pediatric Trauma Center: May consider transport to nearest appropriate facility.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Ground transportation guidelines</p>
<ol>
<li>Patients should be transported to the nearest appropriate facility if any of the following exists:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Airway is unstable and cannot be controlled/managed by conventional methods.</p>
<p>b. Potential for unstable airway, (i.e., facial/upper torso burn)</p>
<p>c. Blunt trauma arrest (no pulses or respirations)</p>
<p>d. Patient does NOT meet criteria for a trauma patient as defined above.</p>
<p>C. Air Medical Transportation</p>
<ol>
<li>General principles</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Prolonged delays at the scene waiting for air medical transport should be avoided.</p>
<p>b. If air medical transportation is unavailable. (e.g., weather conditions), patient should be transported by ground guidelines as listed above.</p>
<p>c. Air transport, if dispatched to the scene, should be diverted to the hospital if the patient appeared appropriate for air transport but the decision was made to transport to the nearest facility (non-trauma center) in the interim.</p>
<p>d. Air Transport Programs share the responsibility to educate EMS units and facilities on program that provides feedback to EMS units.</p>
<p>e. Patients with uncontrolled ABCs should be taken to the closest appropriate facility (24-hour emergency department) if that can be achieved prior to the arrival of air medical transport.</p>
<p>f. Traumatic cardiac arrest due to blunt trauma is not appropriate for air transport.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Reasons to consider a call for air transport:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Prolonged extrication</p>
<p>b. Multiple victims/trauma patients</p>
<p>c. Time/distance factors:</p>
<p>d. If the transportation time to a trauma center by ground is greater than 30 minutes AND the transport time by ground to the nearest trauma center is greater than the total transport time** to a trauma center by helicopter.</p>
<p>i. **Total transport time includes any time at the scene waiting for a helicopter and transport time to the trauma center.</p>
<p>ii. In the rural environment, immediate transfer with severely traumatized patients by air transport may be appropriate and should be encouraged if it does not significantly delay intervention for immediate life-threatening injuries.</p>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. Exceptions to these Trauma Triage Guidelines are listed in the Trauma Patient Assessment and Transport Guidelines Protocol SB206 under Section VI. These same exceptions apply to pediatric, adult, and geriatric trauma patients.</p>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Age</th>
<th>Pulse</th>
<th>Respirations</th>
<th>Avg. Systolic</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Infant (1-12mo)</td>
<td>90-180</td>
<td>30-53</td>
<td>&gt;70</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Toddler (1-2yrs)</td>
<td>80-140</td>
<td>22-37</td>
<td>&gt;70</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Preschool (3-5yrs)</td>
<td>60-120</td>
<td>20-28</td>
<td>&gt;80</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>School Age (6-12yrs)</td>
<td>58-118</td>
<td>18-25</td>
<td>&gt;85</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Adolescent (12+ yrs)</td>
<td>50-100</td>
<td>12-20</td>
<td>&gt;90</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
