---


---

<h1 id="symptom-based-chest-pain">Symptom Based Chest Pain</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient’s age is 16 years or older.</p>
<p>B. Patient complains of discomfort that may be suggestive of cardiac origin.</p>
<p>C. Patient has a complaint that may be suggestive of pleuritic or of respiratory origin.</p>
<p>D. Patient has a complaint that may be of musculoskeletal origin.</p>
<p><strong>II. Differential Diagnosis</strong></p>
<p>A. Acute Coronary Syndrome</p>
<p>B. Dysrhythmias</p>
<p>C. Musculoskeletal complaints</p>
<p>D. Respiratory complaints</p>
<p>E. Gastrointestinal complaints</p>
<p><strong>III. General Chest Pain assessment</strong></p>
<p>A. Provide care in a calm and reassuring manner.</p>
<p>B. Place the patient in a position of comfort.</p>
<p>C. Obtain a focused history and physical. If there is the complaint of chest pain, the history should include: onset, provoking factors, quality, radiation, severity, time, and pertinent negatives.</p>
<p>D. Maintain airway and administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
<p>E. Patients who have a suspected diagnosis of Acute Coronary Syndrome should be treated utilizing the ACS Protocol M400.</p>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<p>F. If no Paramedic available, obtain diagnostic EKG (if available and appropriately trained) and transmit to receiving hospital.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>G. Place the patient on a cardiac monitor. If the rhythm is not of sinus origin (between 60-140) go to the appropriate Dysrhythmia Protocol.</p>
<p>H. Obtain a diagnostic EKG and transmit if appropriate.</p>
<p>I. In the setting of submersion injury, no adjustment in treatment is required.</p>

