---


---

<h1 id="symptom-based-respiratory-distress">Symptom Based Respiratory Distress</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Patients of any age.</p>
<p>B. Patient complains of severe/worsening shortness of breath.</p>
<p>C. Patient has a past medical history of Asthma, Emphysema, or COPD.</p>
<p>D. Patient may be prescribed inhaler and/or other respiratory medications.</p>
<p>E. Lung exam has stridor, rales, wheezing, decreased breath sounds, or poor air exchange.</p>
<p>F. Pale, cyanotic, or flushed skin.</p>
<p>G. Use of accessory muscles of respiration.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>MAY have retractions, nasal flaring, rapid respiratory rate (greater than 24), or pursed lip breathing.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Tripod/positional breathing.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Inability to speak in full sentences.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Restlessness or anxiety.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Altered/decreased mental status.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>MAY have jugular venous distention or peripheral edema.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>May have symptoms of Epiglottitis or Croup.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>H. If EKG findings are other than normal sinus rhythm, sinus tachycardia, or atrial fibrillation with controlled ventricular response, proceed to appropriate arrhythmia protocol.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>II. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Maintain airway and administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
<p>B. If the patient is in impending respiratory failure, follow the T705 Airway Protocol.</p>
<p>C. Allow patient to sit up in a position of comfort.</p>
<p>D. Apply cardiac monitor, if available.</p>
<p>E. Obtain a diagnostic EKG, if available.</p>
<p>F. Consider early application of ETCO2 monitoring.</p>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<p>G. If available, request ALS back-up for:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Adult patient with pulse greater than 120 and respiratory rate greater than 24.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patients less than 16 years old, with respiratory rate greater than 50 or who have wheezing, grunting, retractions, stridor and/or any other sign of respiratory distress.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient who doesn’t have a prescribed inhaler and the transport time is greater than 30 minutes.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p>H. Consider CPAP (Protocol T709).</p>
<p>I. Monitor Vital Signs.</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p>J. Establish IV access.</p>
<h2 id="all-3">ALL</h2>
<p>K. If the patient has chest pain suggestive of cardiac origin, dyspnea, no evidence of trauma, AND</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Systolic blood pressure of less than 80 mm Hg, OR</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Systolic blood pressure of 80-100 mm Hg and a pulse greater than 120, skin changes suggestive of shock, or altered mental status,</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>GO TO THE CARDIOGENIC SHOCK PROTOCOL M401.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>L. If the patient has a dysrhythmia,</p>
<ol>
<li>GO TO THE APPROPRIATE DYSRYTHMIA PROTOCOL.</li>
</ol>
<p>M. If the patient is unable to speak because of an airway obstruction or has a history suggestive of foreign body aspiration, i.e., sudden shortness of breath while eating, OR</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>If the patient exhibits stridor lung sounds,</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>GO TO THE OBSTRUCTION OR STRIDOR PROTOCOL M402 or P606.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>N. If the patient has a history of Asthma, Emphysema or COPD, AND complains of a worsening shortness of breath,</p>
<ol>
<li>GO TO THE ASTHMA – COPD PROTOCOL M403 or P607.</li>
</ol>
<p>O. If the patient has a history of heart disease, a respiratory rate greater than 24 and a systolic blood pressure greater than 100 mm HG.</p>
<ol>
<li>GO TO THE CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE – CHF PROTOCOL M404</li>
</ol>
<p>P. If the patient has hives, itching or swelling</p>
<ol>
<li>GO TO THE ALLERGIC REACTION/ ANAPHYLAXIS PROTOCOL M409 OR P609</li>
</ol>
<p>Q. If Pneumothorax is suspected be aware that this can develop into a Tension Pneumothorax.</p>
<ol>
<li>GO TO THE Tension Pneumothorax Decompression PROTOCOL T701.</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. When attempting to differentiate between COPD and congestive heart failure, the medication history will usually give more valuable information than the physical exam.</p>
<p>B. Do not withhold high concentrations of oxygen from the COPD patient if oxygen is needed. The risks of oxygen therapy in these patients are usually overemphasized. Any rise in PCO2, which may occur is frequently more than offset by the beneficial effects of increased oxygen delivery to the tissue.</p>
<p>C. Transport to the hospital should be initiated immediately if the patient’s airway is compromised or the patient needs advanced airway management. Otherwise, transport should be initiated as soon as possible taking into account the time required to begin pharmacologic therapy.</p>
<p>D. Transport to the closest hospital if you are unable to open or maintain the airway.</p>
<p>E. In the setting of an adult submersion injury, no adjustment in treatment is required.</p>

