---


---

<h1 id="crashing-patient">Crashing Patient</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. PURPOSE</strong></p>
<p>A. EMS frequently encounters patients that are critically ill and quickly deteriorating. Stabilization on scene, prior to loading and transporting, prevents further deterioration and leads to better morbidity and mortality.</p>
<p>B. This protocol serves as a guideline of critical actions that should be considered prior to loading and transporting.</p>
<p><strong>II. CRITERIA</strong></p>
<p>A. Inclusion</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Patient in whom cardiac or respiratory arrest appears imminent.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient suspected of having a critical illness such as altered mental status, airway compromise, respiratory distress/failure, signs/symptoms of shock/poor perfusion.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Exclusion</p>
<ol>
<li>Life-threatening trauma that has not been corrected.</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>III. PROCEDURE</strong></p>
<p>A. Critical Actions (ideally accomplished before moving the patient)</p>
<ol>
<li>Airway</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Insert nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal airway as indicated if not following commands or no response to verbal stimulus per (T705 Airway).</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Breathing</li>
</ol>
<p>a. If respiratory failure or distress, sit patient up if tolerated and not contraindicated.</p>
<p>b. Provide oxygen per (SB200 Clinical Practice Standards).</p>
<p>c. If respirations are below age-appropriate normal, ventilate by BVM. Two-person, two handed technique is most effective.</p>
<p>d. If adult and tachypneic but respirations inadequate, apply CPAP for respiratory distress/hypoxia per (T709 CPAP/BiPAP Procedure).</p>
<p>e. Consider PPV via BVM if not following commands or SpO2 &lt;90%.</p>
<p>f. Consider initiating bronchodilator therapy per (M403 Asthma-COPD Protocol)</p>
<ol start="3">
<li>Monitoring</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Frequent NIBP</p>
<p>b. SpO2</p>
<p>c. Continuous waveform capnography</p>
<p>d. Monitor</p>
<p>B. Immediate actions (ideally before moving the patient)</p>
<ol>
<li>Circulation</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>a. Electrical therapy if dysrhythmia is primary cause of shock per relevant cardiac protocol.</p>
<p>b. Emergent IV/IO access per T711 IO Procedure as applicable.</p>
<p>c. Administer IV fluid bolus per SB205 Hypotension/Shock protocols.</p>
<p>d. Consider push-dose epinephrine per SB205 Hypotension/Shock protocol.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>C. Ongoing Assessments</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Reassess vital signs frequently.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Reassess response to treatments.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<ol start="3">
<li>Circulation</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Repeat fluid bolus if indicated.</p>
<p>b. Consider push-dose epinephrine if indicated.</p>
<p>c. Contact Medical Control for additional fluids/vasopressors.</p>
<ol start="4">
<li>Airway</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Consider advanced airway if indicated per T705 Airway.</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p>D. Loading/transporting</p>
<ol>
<li>Once critical and immediate actions have been completed, consider movement to the ambulance for transport. Frequently reassess patient status during movement. Transport may be initiated earlier per provider discretion.</li>
</ol>
<p>E. Unloading/arrival to hospital</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Keep the patient on continuous monitoring until care is safely transitioned to hospital equipment.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Early notification to the hospital of a critical patient is recommended.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If the patient is on CPAP/BiPAP, keep the patient on this intervention until the hospital staff are prepared to switch to their equipment, whenever possible.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>IV. NOTES</strong></p>
<p>A. Time lengths are approximate and are intended to create urgency with actions. When unable to meet these goals, note barriers to care in documentation.</p>
<p>B. Actions should be simultaneous and are not in a specific order for a given timeframe.</p>
<p>C. This protocol is a supplement to other protocols and is not intended to supersede others.</p>

