---


---

<h1 id="refusal-of-treatment-andor-transport">Refusal of Treatment and/or Transport</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p>I. <strong>Purpose</strong></p>
<p>A. Adult patients with present mental capacity retain the right to refuse care and/or transport against medical advice.</p>
<p>B. Parents or guardians of minor children may refuse on behalf of a minor child but must meet capacity requirements for informed refusal. In the absence of a parent or guardian, a minor can be left in the care of a responsible adult. Contact medical control, if necessary, for assistance.</p>
<p>C. Legal guardians/caregivers of adult patients with proper documentation of medical power of attorney may also refuse care on behalf of adult patients if capacity requirements are met for the caregiver.</p>
<p>D. This protocol does NOT apply in mass casualty incidents.</p>
<p>II. <strong>Patient Refusal</strong></p>
<p>A. If a patient (or the parent or legal guardian of the patient) refuses care and/or transport to a hospital after EMS have been called to the scene, EMS should determine the patient’s capacity to make decisions. Competency is a legal definition that is determined by the court of law.</p>
<p>B. Assessment</p>
<ol>
<li>Decision-Making Capacity</li>
</ol>
<p>a. A patient (or the parent or legal guardian of the patient) who is alert, oriented, and can understand the circumstances surrounding his/her illness or impairment, as well as the possible risks associated with refusing treatment and/or transport, typically is considered to have decision-making capacity.</p>
<p>b. The patient’s (or the parent or legal guardian of the patient) judgment must also not be significantly impaired by illness, injury, or drugs/alcohol intoxication. Individuals who have attempted suicide, verbalized suicidal intent, or had other factors that lead EMS to suspect suicidal intent, should not be regarded as having decision-making capacity. It is highly recommended to discuss the best course of action with the police.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Treatment and Interventions</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Obtain a complete set of vital signs and complete an initial assessment, paying particular attention to the individual’s neurologic and mental status.</p>
<p>b. Determine the patient’s capacity (or the parent or legal guardian of the patient) to make a valid judgment concerning the extent of his/her illness or injury; if EMS has doubts about whether the individual has the mental capacity to refuse or if the patient lacks capacity, EMS should contact medical control.</p>
<p>c. If patient (or the parent or legal guardian of the patient) has capacity, clearly explain to the individual and all responsible parties the possible risks and overall concerns with regards to refusing care and that they may reengage the EMS system if needed.</p>
<p>d. Perform appropriate medical care with the consent of the patient.</p>
<p>e. Complete the patient care report, including patient refusal form, clearly documenting the initial assessment findings and the discussions with all involved individuals regarding the possible consequences of refusing additional prehospital care and/or transportation.</p>
<p>C. Non-Transport Guidelines:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Patient’s presenting with upper respiratory infection (URI) symptoms such as runny nose, measured or subjective fever, cough, nasal/chest congestion, body aches, and/or sore throat should be properly examined and should they meet below criteria, may be candidates for non-transport and home care.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Non-transport decision <strong>MUST</strong> be made and well documented in the PCR by highest certified personnel on the scene, preferably a paramedic.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient or guardian must have mental capacity and consent to non-transport as noted in sections above.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Home care must be suitable for the patient meaning they have caregivers if needed, suitable living conditions, and access to food/water.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Encourage patient to call 911 for worsening or serious symptoms</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Non-Transport Inclusion Criteria: <strong>(meet all of the following)</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Age &gt;15 and &lt;50</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>URI symptoms present as noted above</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Vitals Signs:</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Respiratory Rate 8-20 breaths/min</p>
<p>b. Pulse oximetry &gt;94% on room air</p>
<p>c. Heart rate &lt;100 BPM</p>
<p>d. Systolic BP &gt;100mmHg</p>
<p>E. Non-Transport Exclusion Criteria:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Chest pain, other than with mild coughing</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Shortness of breath at rest</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Syncope/loss of consciousness</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Altered mental status</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>History of diabetes, heart disease, lung disease, immunocompromise, cancer, or currently pregnancy</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Any other concern by on-scene personnel that it would be unsafe to not transport patient</p>
</li>
</ol>

