---


---

<h1 id="blood-and-blood-product-administration">Blood and Blood Product Administration</h1>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>I. INCLUSION CRITERIA</strong></p>
<p>A. Clinical suspicion for significant blood loss with signs and/or symptoms of inadequate tissue perfusion concerning suggestive of SHOCK.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Penetrating trauma</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Unstable pelvic fracture or multiple long bone fractures</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Blunt Trauma</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Observed significant external blood loss</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Signs and symptoms of massive GI bleed, ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm, post-partum hemorrhage, or ruptured ectopic pregnancy.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>B. AND Presence of hemodynamic instability as evidenced 2 or more physiological criteria:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>EtCO2 &lt; 25</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Shock index &gt; 1.0</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Sustained systolic blood pressure &lt; 90mmHg or map 65 mmHg (sustained is defined as 2 independent blood pressure measurements)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If patient has polytrauma with concurrent TBI with systolic blood pressure &lt; 100</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Sustained heart rate &gt; 120 beats per minute</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Pediatric hypotension (a sign of uncompensated shock)</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>i. Neonates (0-28 days): systolic blood pressure &lt; 60 mmHg</p>
<p>ii. Infants (1 month – 12 months): systolic blood pressure &lt; 70mmHg</p>
<p>iii. Children (1 year – 10 years): systolic blood pressure &lt; 70 + (2 x age in years) mmHg</p>
<p>iv. Children (&gt;10 years): systolic blood pressure ≤ 90 mmHg</p>
<ol start="7">
<li>
<p>Sustained tachycardia for age (see chart below)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Tachypnea for age (see chart below)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Cool pale skin with cap refill &gt;2 seconds</p>
</li>
</ol>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Age</th>
<th>Pulse (beats/min)</th>
<th>Respirations (breaths/min)</th>
<th>Avg. Systolic Blood Pressure</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Infant (1-12mo)</td>
<td>90-180</td>
<td>30-53</td>
<td>&gt;70</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Toddler (1-2 years)</td>
<td>80-140</td>
<td>22-37</td>
<td>&gt;70</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Preschool (3-5 years)</td>
<td>60-120</td>
<td>20-28</td>
<td>&gt;80</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>School Age (6-12 years)</td>
<td>58-118</td>
<td>18-25</td>
<td>&gt;85</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Adolescent (12+ years)</td>
<td>50-100</td>
<td>12-20</td>
<td>&gt;90</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table><p>C. OR witnessed traumatic or medical cardiac arrest reasonably suspected have a hemorrhagic component, and blood products are available for administration within 5 minutes of loss of pulses, or a narrow-complex rhythm &gt;40BPM is present</p>
<p><strong>III.</strong> <strong>CONTRAINDICATIONS</strong></p>
<p>A. Personal or religious objection to receiving blood products.</p>
<p><strong>IV.</strong> <strong>PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p>A. Ensure applicable hemorrhage control and shock interventions have been performed:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Tourniquet</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Wound packing</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Pelvic binder</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Needle decompression</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Ensure adequate personnel are on scene to adequately manage all concurrent priorities.</p>
<p>C. Ensure patent IV/IO access preferably 18 gauge or larger (IV is preferred over IO).</p>
<p>D. Document pre-transfusion vital signs, including heart rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure, ETCO2, SPO2, and body temperature.</p>
<p>E. Only remove blood products from cooler immediately before transfusion.</p>
<p>F. Examine unit of blood (looking for discoloration, clots, and sediment) and ensure the temperature indicator on the blood product bag indicates the appropriate temperature.</p>
<p>G. Gently agitate the blood product bag and use only filtered blood tubing for administration.</p>
<p>H. Prime blood tubing and warming unit. (If available commercial warming device).</p>
<p>I. Initiate transfusion</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Adult patients: 1 unit</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Pediatric patients: 10 mL/kg</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>J. Reassess for clinical improvement</p>
<ol>
<li>Patients with non-compressible hemorrhage:</li>
</ol>
<p>i. Look for signs of improved perfusion</p>
<p>A. Presence of radial pulses</p>
<p>B. Improved mentation</p>
<p>C. Use the permissive hypotension approach</p>
<p>a. 90 mmHg for patients &lt; 35kg</p>
<p>b. 100 mmHg for patients ≥35kg</p>
<p>c. 110 mmHg for patients &gt;35kg with significant TBI</p>
<p>K. If inadequate clinical improvement, repeat transfusion</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Adult patients: 1 unit</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Pediatric patients: 10 mL/kg</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>L. Maintain normal body temperature</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Apply thermal cap to the patient</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Cover the patient with a sheet and Ready Heat Blanket, if available</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>M. Administer 30mL of 10% Calcium Gluconate or 10mL of 10% Calcium Chloride through a separate IV/IO line during or immediately after the first unit of blood is administered.</p>
<ol>
<li>Pediatric patients: &lt; 12 years: 10% Calcium Chloride 20 mg/kg slow IV/IO</li>
</ol>
<p>N. Administer tranexamic acid through a separate IV/IO line</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Adult patients: 1 gram IVPB over 10 minutes</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Pediatric patients &gt; 12 years: 1 gram IVPB over 10 minutes</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Pediatric patients &lt; 12 years: 15 mg/kg IV/IO IVPB over 10 minutes</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>O. Continue to reassess and monitor for signs of a blood transfusion reaction</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Signs and symptoms of a transfusion reaction may include sudden onset fever (this may be the first sign), wheezing, dyspnea, flushing, chills, sudden worsening of hypotension, tachycardia not consistent with the underlying condition, feeling of impending doom or worsening anxiety, new abdominal, chest, or back pain.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For any suspected transfusion reaction, immediately STOP the transfusion, flush the IV/IO, and contact medical control</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Retain the blood product and tubing and report the reaction in accordance with Department SOP.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Treat anaphylaxis per the Allergic Reaction/Anaphylaxis protocol M409.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>V.</strong> Notes: Every agency who will be carrying blood products should develop an operating procedure in concert with the issuing blood bank covering storage requirements, daily quality assurance procedures, reporting requirements with the blood bank, and required hand-off paperwork with the receiving hospital.</p>

