---


---

<h1 id="tension-pneumothorax-decompression">Tension Pneumothorax Decompression</h1>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>I. INDICATIONS</strong></p>
<p>A. Patients of all ages.</p>
<p>B. Patient with confirmed or suspected pneumothorax, including:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Patient with confirmed or suspected chest trauma</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient receiving positive pressure ventilation</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>High suspicion for spontaneous pneumothorax <strong>AND</strong> one or more Signs of Shock/Tension Pneumothorax</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Hypotension</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Persistent Hypoxia</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Traumatic cardiac arrest without obviously fatal wounds</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Severe or progressive respiratory distress</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Severe or progressive tachypnea</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Difficulty with manual ventilation or decreased tidal volume.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>II. COMPLICATIONS</strong></p>
<p>A. Hemorrhage from or injury to vessels, diaphragm, or organ laceration.</p>
<p>B. Creation of a pneumothorax if one was not already present.</p>
<p>C. Laceration of the lung.</p>
<p>D. Infection.</p>
<p>E. Retained Foreign Body from Catheter</p>
<p><strong>III. PROCEDURE</strong></p>
<p>A. Maintain airway and administer oxygen</p>
<p>B. Fully expose the entire chest and clean the procedure area of the affected side.</p>
<p>C. Prepare for the procedure using appropriate commercial device or one of three techniques:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Attach a 3.25” 10-14G IV catheter and needle to a large syringe.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Use the 3.25” 10-14G IV catheter and needle with a one-way, multiposition valve (3-way stopcock), or commercial device.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Use the 3.25” 10-14G IV needle and catheter alone leaving it open to air.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For pediatrics use following devices:</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. ≤12 years of age: standard 14g or 16g 1.5” needle into 4th ICS anterior axillary line</p>
<ol start="5">
<li>Morbidly obese patients may require longer needles when necessary.</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Discontinue automatic ventilator, if using.</p>
<p>E. Insert the IV catheter and needle assembly in one of two locations:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>The 5th intercostal space in the anterior axillary line (AAL)) or</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Over the top of the rib in the 2nd intercostal space in the midclavicular line (MCL) (i.e., do not insert medial to the nipple line)</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>F. Ensure needle entry is not medial to the nipple line or directed toward the heart and is inserted all the way to the hub.</p>
<p>G. If a tension pneumothorax is present, then a rush of air may be heard, or the plunger of the syringe will be easy to pull back.</p>
<p>H. After waiting 5-10 seconds to allow for decompression to occur, remove the needle from the catheter and leave the plastic catheter in place.</p>
<p>I. Assess for signs of successful decompression:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Improved vital signs</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Improved work of breathing</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Improved ventilation compliance</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>J. Consider repeat needle decompression if signs and symptoms of tension pneumothorax persist.</p>
<p><strong>NOTES:</strong></p>
<p>A. Tension pneumothorax is rare; but when present, it must be treated promptly.</p>
<p>B. Pneumothorax without tension physiology (i.e., “simple pneumothorax”) i is not immediately life threatening and should not be treated with needle decompression in the field.</p>
<p>C. Positive pressure ventilation may lead to rapid progression from simple pneumothorax to tension pneumothorax.</p>
<p>D. Should symptoms develop while a chest seal is in place, providers should “burp” the seal or ensure vented system is not occluded before decompressing chest, but this should not delay needle decompression.</p>
<p>E. In patients with shock not responsive to fluid resuscitation, consider UNTREATED tension pneumothorax as possible cause of refractory shock.</p>
<p>F. <strong>PEDIATRIC NEEDLE DECOMPRESSION SHOULD ONLY BE PERFORMED USING IV ANGIOCATH DEVICES UNLESS DIRECTED BY MEDICAL CONTROL.</strong></p>
<p>G. The following are signs of tension pneumothorax that may or may not be present:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Absent or markedly decreased breath sounds on affected side (possible to be both sides simultaneously)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Asymmetric chest rise and fall.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Jugular Vein Distention (JVD)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Tracheal Shift away from affected side (late sign)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Persistent tachypnea following thoracic trauma</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Subcutaneous emphysema</p>
</li>
</ol>

