---


---

<h1 id="emergency-use-of-central-access-device-cvad-and-fistula">Emergency Use of Central Access Device (CVAD) and Fistula</h1>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>I. Indications</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient of any age.</p>
<p>B. Patient has existing central venous access device (CVAD) present.</p>
<p><strong>II. Devices</strong></p>
<p>A. Indwelling Catheter – Examples are PICC Line and Midline venous access devices whose ports are Luer-locked or capped. The tip of the catheter is located in large vein or superior vena cava.</p>
<p>B. Central lines and dialysis catheters are large bore, short length double catheters (may have third tail or lumen). “Arterial” and “venous” labeled lumens are side-by-side in subclavian, internal jugular, or femoral vein. CAUTION: These devices contain high concentrations of heparin. This must be discarded prior to use.</p>
<p>C. Gortex Graft or AV Fistula — Natural or plastic connection between vein and artery usually located under skin on arm. The examiner may feel a “thrill” or auscultate a bruit. These sites have high backpressure due to arterialization of vessel.</p>
<p>D. Implanted Ports – Example includes Port-a-Cath. Requires specialized equipment to access. Single or double (oval) reservoir located under skin on chest wall or forearm. To access, one must insert a Huber needle through skin into the rubber septum. The catheter tip is located in large vein or superior vena cava.</p>
<p><strong>III. Procedure</strong></p>
<p>A. Identify if CVAD is accessible with standard prehospital equipment.</p>
<p>B. Identify shut-off clamps, caps, heparin/saline lock and clamp if disconnecting or opening an existing line.</p>
<p>C. Scrub the access port for 15 seconds with alcohol.</p>
<p>D. Access the device after cleansing.</p>
<p>E. Aspirate with 10 ml syringe until blood return, but site may be functional without return. Only use venous access devices that have a blood return unless the patient or family can verify that the device is functional despite the lack of blood return.</p>
<p>F. Discard aspirated fluid.</p>
<p>G. Flush lumen or port with 10-ml saline, avoiding excessive pressure.</p>
<p>H. Establish tubing connection avoiding air entry.</p>
<p>I. Secure connections</p>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. Do not access immature grafts.</p>
<p>B. Arterial bleeding will result if the needle is dislodged from a dialysis graft or fistula.</p>
<p>C. Dialysis fistulas and grafts (located under skin or arm) may have high back pressure and require positive pressure to infuse.</p>
<p>D. When attempting to insert a needle into a dialysis fistula, avoid the scar line or any lumpy areas. Follow the track marks that are present from previous use of the site for dialysis.</p>

