---


---

<h1 id="spinal-motion-restriction">Spinal Motion Restriction</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<h3 id="the-pdf-version-of-this-protocol-has-a-graphic-flowchart-unable-to-be-reproduced-here.--refer-to-the-full-pdf-version.">The PDF version of this protocol has a graphic flowchart, unable to be reproduced here.  Refer to the full PDF version.</h3>
<p><strong>I. Treatment</strong></p>
<p>A. Patients with penetrating injury to the neck should <strong>NOT</strong> be placed in a cervical collar or other spinal precautions regardless of whether they are exhibiting neurologic symptoms or not. Doing so can lead to delayed identification of injury or airway compromise and has been associated with increased mortality.</p>
<p>B. If extrication is required:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>From a vehicle: After placing a cervical collar, if indicated, children in a booster seat and adults should be allowed to self-extricate. For infants and toddlers already strapped in a car seat with a built-in harness, extricate the child while strapped in his/her car seat.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Other situations requiring extrication: A padded long board may be used for extrication, using the lift and slide (rather than a logroll) technique.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Football helmet removal</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>If a helmet needs to be removed, it is recommended to remove the face mask followed by manual removal (rather than the use of automated devices) of the helmet while keeping the neck manually immobilized - occipital and shoulder padding should be applied, as needed, with the patient in a supine position, in order to maintain neutral cervical spine positioning. (Facemasks can be removed without removing the helmet.)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Evidence is lacking to provide guidance about other types of helmet removal.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Do <strong>NOT</strong> transport patients on rigid long boards unless the clinical situation warrants long board use. An example of this may be facilitation of immobilization of multiple extremity injuries or an unstable patient where removal of a board will delay transport and/or other treatment priorities. <strong>In these situations, long boards should ideally be padded or have a vacuum mattress applied to minimize secondary injury to the patient.</strong></p>
<p>E. Patients with severe kyphosis or ankylosing spondylitis may not tolerate a cervical collar. These patients should be immobilized in a position of comfort using towel rolls or sandbags.</p>
<p>F. Pediatrics with torticollis (twisted neck) after a traumatic injury should be treated as a having a cervical spine injury and immobilized with a cervical collar.</p>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. Children are abdominal breathers, so immobilization straps should go across chest and pelvis and not across the abdomen, when possible</p>
<p>B. Children have disproportionately larger heads. When securing pediatric patients to a spine board, the board should have a recess for the head, or the body should be elevated approximately 1-2 cm to accommodate the larger head size and avoid neck flexion when immobilized.</p>
<p>C. In an uncooperative patient, avoid interventions that may promote increased spinal movement.</p>
<p>D. Evidence is lacking to support or refute the use of manual stabilization prior to spinal assessment in the setting of a possible traumatic injury when the patient is alert with spontaneous head/neck movement. Providers should not manually stabilize the alert and spontaneously moving patients, since patients with pain will self-limit movement, and forcing immobilization in this scenario may unnecessarily increase discomfort and anxiety.</p>
<p>E. Certain populations with musculoskeletal instability may be predisposed to cervical spine injury. However, evidence does not support or refute that these patients should be treated differently than those who do not have these conditions. These patients should be treated according to the Spinal Motion Restriction protocol like other patients without these conditions.</p>
<p>F. Age alone should not be a factor in decision-making for prehospital spine care, yet the patient’s ability to reliably be assessed at the extremes of age should be considered. Communication barriers with infants/toddlers or elderly patients with dementia may prevent the provider from accurately assessing the patient.</p>
<p>G. Spinal precautions should be considered a treatment or preventive therapy.</p>
<p>H. Patients who are likely to benefit from immobilization should undergo this treatment.</p>
<p>I. Patients who are not likely to benefit from immobilization, who have a low likelihood of spinal injury, should not be immobilized.</p>
<p>J. Ambulatory patients may be safely immobilized on stretcher with cervical collar and straps and will not generally require a spine board.</p>
<p>K. Reserve long spine board use for the movement of patients whose injuries limit ambulation and who meet criteria for the use of spinal precautions. Remove from the long board as soon as is practical.</p>
<p>L. If your jurisdiction responds to organized school sporting events, it is suggested that you make contact with the athletic trainer / medical staff at the school to review their spinal immobilization procedure / E.A.P; and if possible, practice these procedures interdepartmentally and or with the Schools medical team prior to or at the beginning of the school year / sport season (football, hockey, lacrosse).</p>
<p><strong>References:</strong></p>
<p>A. NASEMSO. National Model EMS Clinical Guidelines V3. March 2022.</p>
<p>B. Peter E. Fischer, Debra G. Perina, Theodore R. Delbridge, Mary E. Fallat, Jeffrey P. Salomone, Jimm Dodd, Eileen M. Bulger &amp; Mark L. Gestring (2022) Spinal Motion Restriction in the Trauma Patient – A Joint Position Statement, Prehospital Emergency Care, DOI: 10.1080/10903127.2022.1481476</p>

