---


---

<h1 id="airway-management-procedure">Airway Management Procedure</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. INTRODUCTION</strong></p>
<p>A. Patients of all ages.</p>
<p>B. Airway skills are essential to all providers. This protocol is developed to guide the provider through the progressive and complicated steps of appropriate airway management. The protocol is designed to provide progressively more aggressive airway techniques dependent upon the patient’s condition. The paramedic should always be mindful that BASIC AIRWAY SKILLS ARE ESSENTIAL! Most airways can be managed with well performed basic airway maneuvers.</p>
<p>C. Indications:</p>
<ol>
<li>In general, the need for airway management or ventilatory support should be identified using rapid “global assessment” techniques. Except for apnea, there is no isolated single indicator of the need for airway or ventilatory management. Therefore, the patient should be globally assessed for any of the following indicators of airway obstruction and/or ventilatory insufficiency/failure.</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Airway patency and respiratory effort (breathing) must be assessed in all patients.</p>
<p>b. Indications of airway compromise MUST be recognized at the earliest opportunity.</p>
<p>c. Indications of failure to maintain or protect the airway may include:</p>
<p>i. Lack of air movement at the mouth/nose.</p>
<p>ii. Stridorous or snoring respirations.</p>
<p>iii. Gurgling sound with breathing.</p>
<p>iv. Failure of a normal gag reflex.</p>
<p>v. Adventitious breath sounds (wheezing, rhonchi, rales).</p>
<p>vi. Absent breath sounds.</p>
<p>vii. Loss of end-tidal carbon dioxide readings.</p>
<p>d. Indications of respiratory insufficiency/failure may include:</p>
<p>i. Decreased mental status.</p>
<p>ii. Apprehension or agitation.</p>
<p>iii. Increased respiratory rate.</p>
<p>iv. Obvious respiratory fatigue.</p>
<p>v. Accessory muscle use (suprasternal, intercostal, abdominal muscles).</p>
<p>vi. Apnea.</p>
<p>vii. Shortness of breath.</p>
<p>viii. Pallor, Cyanosis, low pulse oximetry readings.</p>
<p>ix. Nasal flaring.</p>
<p>x. Abnormal breathing pattern: rapid, slow, or shallow (This may be age specific).</p>
<p>xi. Asymmetric chest wall movement.</p>
<p>xii. Increasing end-tidal carbon dioxide readings.</p>
<p><strong>II. PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p>A. This protocol presents an algorithmic approach to this important procedure in emergency medicine.1</p>
<p>B. Establish the need for airway intervention based on assessment (see indications above)</p>
<p>C. Apply basic airway techniques.</p>
<ol>
<li>Head-tilt chin-lift</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Use Jaw thrust technique in trauma patients suspected of having a cervical spine injury.</p>
<p>i. Utilize the Head-tilt chin-lift only as a last resort basic airway technique in the trauma patient. Immobilization of a patient with a compromised airway using a c-collar and backboard should only be considered / performed in the trauma patient. Utilizing the reverse Trendelenburg position by elevating the head of the cot / backboard 20 degrees has shown benefits to both patients with a compromised airway and during intubation by facilitating better laryngeal exposure during direct laryngoscopy and reducing atelectatic collapse of the posterior lungs.</p>
<p>b. Jaw thrust.</p>
<p>c. Use this technique for patients suspected of having a cervical spine injury.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Basic airway adjuncts should always be used during BVM ventilations.</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Nasopharyngeal airway should be used for obtunded or unconscious patients.</p>
<p>b. Oropharyngeal airway should be used in patients that are unconscious only.</p>
<p>c. Both airway techniques may stimulate the patients gag reflex and cause vomiting. Be prepared to suction.</p>
<ol start="3">
<li>Basic Airway attempt failure.</li>
</ol>
<p>a. If a patent airway is not obtainable after basic skills attempts (chest rise and/or audible bilateral breath sounds), default immediately to supraglottic/extraglottic airway device.</p>
<p>D. After successful basic airway techniques, a decision to provide a more definitive airway should be based on the following indications:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>The patient’s mental status will not maintain a sufficient airway.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Concern for potential vomiting and aspiration.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Excess oropharyngeal fluids not well managed by the patient (blood)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Excessive work of respiratory effort indicating impending respiratory failure.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>E. Tracheal Intubation</p>
<ol>
<li>See T706 Orotracheal Intubation Protocol</li>
</ol>
<p>F. Drug Assisted Intubation (DAI) and Rapid Sequence Intubation (RSI)</p>
<ol>
<li>See A102 Pharmacologic-Assisted Intubation.</li>
</ol>
<p>G. Tracheostomy Dislodgement</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Most of the time, a dislodged tracheostomy tube does not require any extraordinary measures by EMS providers besides assessment and transport for evaluation.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Assessment:</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Determine if the patient is in respiratory distress.</p>
<p>i. If yes, determine length of time the tracheostomy tube has been in place.</p>
<p>ii. If no, transport in position of comfort.</p>
<p>b. Was the tracheostomy performed in the last 7 days?</p>
<p>i. If yes, control the airway with a supraglottic/extraglottic device or oral intubation (if the patient has not had a laryngectomy).</p>
<p>ii. If no,</p>
<p>A. If the patient is able to ventilate adequately through the stoma, may trial oxygenation through stoma with NRB mask,</p>
<p>B. Make sure tracheostomy tube is clean and clear and attempt to re-insert it or a cuffed ETT of equal size (if unknown, size 6) through the stoma, advancing the cuff just past the opening.</p>
<p>C. If this fails, attempt orotracheal intubation (if patient has not had a laryngectomy.</p>
<p>D. Confirm tube placement with capnography, continually monitor during transport.</p>
<p>H. <strong>R****ESCUE</strong> <strong>A****IRWAY</strong> <strong>(A****LTERNATIVE</strong> <strong>A****IRWAY</strong> <strong>D<strong><strong>EVICE</strong></strong>)<strong><strong>2</strong> **S</strong><strong>UPRAGLOTTIC</strong></strong>/<strong><strong>EXTRAGLOTTIC</strong> <strong>A</strong>**IRWAY</strong> <strong>D****EVICE</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>In the case of a failed attempt at intubation, reversion to basic airway skills is essential. A rescue airway/alternate airway device should be employed as needed to maintain the airway. There are numerous types of rescue/alternate airway devices available. Each emergency medical service Medical Director will approve the device to be used by the service and provide the appropriate training in the use of that device.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Use of an alternative rescue airway device may proceed or substitute for endotracheal intubation when patient anatomy or the situation indicates.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Per scope of practice EMT’s may use many alternate airway devices.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>I. <strong>END TIDAL CO2 DETECTION</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>Waveform capnography must be used to confirm and monitor endotracheal tube and rescue airway placement in the field, in the transport vehicle, on arrival at the hospital, and after any patient transfer to reduce the risk of unrecognized tube misplacement or displacement.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>III. SURGICAL AIRWAY</strong></p>
<p>A. In rare cases when an airway cannot be managed by either basic, advanced or rescue airway techniques, a surgical airway may need to be performed.</p>
<p>B. Indications</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Acute upper airway obstruction, which cannot be relieved by basic airway obstruction skills or the utilization of Magill forceps for direct removal.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Respiratory arrest with facial or neck anatomy or injury that makes endotracheal intubation impossible.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Each emergency medical service Medical Director will approve the surgical airway device to be used by the service and provide the appropriate training in the use of that device.</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>IV. DOCUMENTATION</strong></p>
<p>A. A complete record of each airway attempt should be placed in the patient care record. Each airway intervention (including basic skills) should include the following (if applicable):</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Precautions taken (i.e., in-line stabilization).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Size of device.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The number of intubation attempts shall not exceed 2 attempts at oral tracheal intubation, if that attempt fails, secure the airway with a supraglottic/extraglottic airway rescue airway or use a simple airway with BVM ventilations.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Depth of insertion (i.e., “X” number of centimeters at the lips/teeth).</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>5.Complications encountered.</p>
<ol start="6">
<li>Method of confirmation of correct placement (e.g., esophageal intubation detector, clinical exam).</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic-2">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>V. P****EDIATRIC</strong> <strong>V****ENTILATOR</strong> <strong>D****EPENDENT</strong> <strong>&amp; T****RACHEOSTOMY</strong> <strong>D****EPENDENT</strong></p>
<p>A. These patients can develop an airway occlusion due to a mucus plug. In the event of an occlusion the following interventions should be followed:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Suction the trach. In the event this does not clear the airway, then</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Change the trach. If you are not able to reinsert the trach, then</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Insert the next smaller size. If not able to insert the next smaller size, then</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>An ET of the smaller size can be inserted. (Note ET can only be inserted the length of the trach and needs to be secured.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>VI. PEDIATRIC VENTILATOR DEPENDENT &amp; TRACHEOSTOMY DEPENDENT NOTES:</strong></p>
<p>A. Some of these patients can NOT be orally intubated or may be difficult to intubate.</p>
<p>B. Most of these patients respond better to being on a ventilator than being bagged. These patients have portable ventilator with their setting preset.</p>
<p>C. The parents or care givers of these patients are going to be your best resource for history and care of these patients.</p>
<p>D. Many parents will have trach’s of various sizes.</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>NOTES:</strong></p>
<p>A. Once airway is established assure high flow oxygen delivery.</p>
<p>B. In a suspected opioid overdose, utilization of successful basic airway skills will allow your patient to be treated with naloxone therefore avoiding the need for advanced airway placement.</p>
<p>C. It is recommended that inline end tidal CO2 (when available) be used in the following settings:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Patients</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Intubated patient.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>E. After placing a supraglottic/extraglottic airway device with designated gastric suction access, placing a gastric suction tube into the stomach via the designated channel (either connected to suction or safely vented to the atmosphere) by an appropriately trained paramedic may enhance airway protection and reduce intrathoracic pressure.</p>
<h3 id="the-full-pdf-version-of-this-protocol-includes-a-graphical-flowchart-unable-to-be-reproduced-here.--refer-to-the-full-pdf-version.">The full PDF version of this protocol includes a graphical flowchart unable to be reproduced here.  Refer to the full PDF version.</h3>
<p><strong>REFERENCES:</strong></p>
<p>A. An Algorithmic Approach to Prehospital Airway Management, Prehospital Emergency Care 2005;9:145–155.</p>
<p>B. Alternate Airways in the Out-of-Hospital Setting Position Statement of the National Association of EMS Physicians, Prehospital Emergency Care, 2007:11:1, 55.</p>

