---


---

<h1 id="orotracheal-intubation-procedure">Orotracheal Intubation Procedure</h1>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>I. INDICATIONS</strong></p>
<p>A. Patients of all ages.</p>
<p>B. After basic airway management skills, advanced airway skills become essential for management of the critically ill patient and are a primary function of the paramedic.</p>
<p><strong>II. CONTRAINDICATIONS</strong></p>
<p>A. Suspected epiglottitis characterized by a sore throat, fever, and drooling.</p>
<p><strong>III. COMPLICATIONS</strong></p>
<p>A. Unrecognized esophageal intubation with subsequent hypoxic brain injury</p>
<p>B. Orotracheal bleeding</p>
<p>C. Injury to vocal cords, epiglottis, or other airway structures</p>
<p>D. Vomiting and subsequent aspiration</p>
<p><strong>IV. PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p>A. Pre-oxygenate the patient if time allows, studies have shown that use of oxygen by nasal cannula at 15 lpm during intubation and insertion of an SGA aid in the pre oxygenation of the patient. Pre oxygenation using a nasal cannula with BVM ventilations also increases the oropharyngeal FiO2 (fraction of inspired oxygen).</p>
<p>B. Chest compressions shall not be interrupted for any airway intervention including intubation or insertion of a supraglottic/extraglottic airway.</p>
<p>C. Assemble and check equipment:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Ventilation equipment, including oxygen by nasal cannula.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Laryngoscope, if available may utilize video laryngoscope</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Choose an appropriate size endotracheal tube (ETT).</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. To size a pediatric ETT the Broselow tape should be used.</p>
<ol start="4">
<li>
<p>Stylet</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Syringe</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Stethoscope</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Endotracheal tube placement verification device</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Continuous capnography MUST be utilized.</p>
<p>b. Color change EtCO2 detector, EID, or EDD may be used in conjunction.</p>
<ol start="8">
<li>
<p>Suction equipment</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Intubation facilitation equipment as available</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. May include (but not limited to):</p>
<p>i. Intubating Stylet (Bougie)</p>
<p>ii. Video laryngoscope</p>
<p>iii. Intubating LMA</p>
<p>D. Position head in “sniffing” position and elevation of the head of the cot by 20 degrees</p>
<ol>
<li>Contraindicated in patients with a known/suspected cervical spine injury. These patients require continuous manual in-line cervical stabilization which is superior to c-collar) during any intubation attempt, if possible, place the patient in reverse Trendelenburg position by elevating the head of the backboard 20 degrees.</li>
</ol>
<p>E. Consider use of a second rescuer or bimanual technique (use of free hand to maneuver trachea) to aid intubation attempt.</p>
<ol>
<li>BURP (Backwards, upwards, rightwards, pressure) technique.</li>
</ol>
<p>F. Insert laryngoscope blade on the right side of the mouth, displacing the tongue to the left (when using a Mac blade).</p>
<p>G. Lift tongue and mandible with laryngoscope</p>
<ol>
<li>Avoiding a “prying” action and laryngoscope contact with teeth.</li>
</ol>
<p>H. Visualize vocal cords and pass the ETT tip through cords to proper depth (approx. 1cm past proximal end of the cuff)</p>
<ol>
<li>Use of adjuncts or intubation facilitation equipment may not require direct visualization of cords. Proper technique and documentation of method used should be followed.</li>
</ol>
<p>I. Inflate cuff with 5-10mL of air.</p>
<p>J. Ventilate patient via bag-valve device.</p>
<p>K. Confirm proper placement as per the “Intubation Verification” in the Airway protocol T705.</p>
<p>L. Secure endotracheal tube BEFORE any patient movement.</p>
<p><strong>V. DOCUMENTATION IN THE PATIENT’S RECORD SHOULD INCLUDE AT LEAST THE FOLLOWING:</strong></p>
<p>A. Precautions taken (i.e., in-line stabilization)</p>
<p>B. Size of tube</p>
<p>C. Number of attempts did not exceed 2 attempts and document use of SGA or BVM with airway adjunct.</p>
<p>D. Depth of insertion (i.e., “X” number of centimeters at the lips/teeth)</p>
<p>E. Complications</p>
<p>F. Method of confirmation of correct placement (e.g., esophageal intubation detector, clinical exam) and ETCO2</p>
<p>G. Adjuncts used.</p>
<p><strong>NOTES:</strong></p>
<p>A. If positive pressure ventilation with the bag-valve device produces sounds of air leakage around the cuff, check the cuff inflation and the tube placement.</p>
<p>B. Whenever possible, pulse oximetry should be used during the procedure to monitor the patient’s oxygenation status.</p>
<p>C. If the patient can vocalize, then the endotracheal tube has not passed through the vocal cords.</p>
<p>D. If there is enough time to intubate the patient in the prehospital setting, then there is enough time to secure the tube. A frequently stated reason for accidental esophageal intubation is “the tube moved.” After each patient movement (e.g., board to stretcher, stretcher to ambulance), the tube position should be rechecked. ETCO2 use provides continuous placement monitoring.</p>
<p>E. When in doubt, take it out; and assure oxygenation by another attempt or method.</p>
<p>F. Both cuffed and uncuffed endotracheal tubes are acceptable for intubating infants and children. Training in inflating cuffed tubes to minimal airway occlusion pressure is important. Over-inflation even for a short time can cause severe damage in certain circumstances (e.g., poor lung compliance, high airway resistance, or a large glottic air leak) a cuffed endotracheal tube may be preferable to an uncuffed tube, provided that attention is paid to endotracheal tube size, position, and cuff inflation pressure (Class IIa, LOE B).</p>

