---


---

<h1 id="pediatric-needle-cricothyrotomy">Pediatric Needle Cricothyrotomy</h1>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p>I. <strong>Indications</strong></p>
<p>A. <strong>Patient’s age is younger than 16 years</strong></p>
<p>B. Acute upper airway obstruction which cannot be relieved using basic airway maneuvers, visualized finger sweep, endotracheal visualization with Magill forceps removal, or endotracheal intubation.</p>
<p>C. Respiratory arrest with facial or neck anatomy or injury that makes endotracheal intubation impossible.</p>
<p>D. Causes of Upper Airway Obstruction</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Airway burns with edema</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Epiglottitis or other life-threatening local infections with swelling of upper airway structures</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Foreign body aspiration</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Laryngeal fractures</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Laryngoedema or angioedema from allergic reactions</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Massive facial trauma</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>II. Complications</strong></p>
<p>A. Subcutaneous emphysema</p>
<p>B. Bleeding (minimized by puncturing in the lower third of the cricothyroid membrane to avoid vessels)</p>
<p>C. Pneumothorax (from allowing insufficient time for passive exhalation in between breaths)</p>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. EQUIPMENT NEEDED:</p>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>&lt;5 years old</th>
<th>&gt;5 years old</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>14g (if &gt;5kg) or 18g (if &lt;5kg) Angiocath type without safety/locking mechanism</td>
<td>14g Angiocath type without safety/locking mechanism</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>IV tubing attached to 2.5mm ET tube adapter</td>
<td>Jet ventilator device -OR- Oxygen tubing with 3-way stopcock attached</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>BVM with pop-off valve safety deactivated</td>
<td>___</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table><ol>
<li>
<p>Saline flush</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Cleaning swab</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Sterile gloves</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Clean towel</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Oxygen source</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Following exposure of the neck, identify the trachea, cricoid cartilage, and cricothyroid membrane below it.</p>
<p>C. Prep the skin, if time permits.</p>
<p>D. Attach a 5 mL syringe with 2-3 mL of saline to a 14- or 18-gauge angiocatheter.</p>
<p>E. Hold the trachea in place and provide skin tension with the thumb and fingers of non-dominant hand.</p>
<p>F. Puncture the cricothyroid membrane with the angiocatheter attached to the syringe. This should be at a 30–45-degree angle from the skin and directed downward toward the patient’s feet.</p>
<p>G. Advance the needle with continual aspiration. The appearance of bubbles confirms tracheal placement. Proceed to slide the cannula off the needle until the hub rests securely on the skin surface. Then reapply the saline syringe to the catheter and reconfirm the appearance of air bubbles.</p>
<p>H. If patient is &lt;5 years of age:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Remove 2.5mm endotracheal tube adapter from endotracheal tube</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Cut standard IV connection tubing so that the 2.5mm adapter can be connected to the open end and the Luer lock can be connected to the angiocatheter</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Attach bag-valve-mask to the endotracheal tube adapter and oxygenate the patient at a rate of at least 20 breaths per minute (1 breath every 3 seconds)</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>I. If patient is ≥5 years of age:</p>
<ol>
<li>Remove the needle with the syringe and connect the cannula to either:</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Manual jet ventilator device.</p>
<p>b. If patient &lt;12 yo, use 25 PSI</p>
<p>c. If patient ≥12 yo, use 50 PSI</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Oxygen tubing attached to 3-way stopcock, with all stopcock channels open</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Set flow to 1LPM/year-of-life up to 15LPM max</p>
<p>b. Occlude the open channel to oxygenate.</p>
<p>J. Oxygenate the patient at a rate of at least 20 breaths per minute (1 breath every 3 seconds).</p>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. Because children vary greatly in size, many commonly used rescue airway devices for adults such as the adult Rusch QuickTrach are not approved for use in pediatric patients.</p>
<p>B. Prepackaged kits for tracheal access using a Seldinger-type technique are available. For example, Pertrach by Pertrach Inc. can be used for pediatric patients with airway obstruction. However, this type of product should be used only upon the direction of medical control.</p>
<p>C. If the cricothyroid membrane cannot be located, the catheter may be safely inserted in a lower intercartilaginous tracheal space.</p>
<p>D. Surgical cricothyroidotomy is typically preferred instead of needle cric in children over 10-12 years of age because of the larger diameter tube used and more effective ventilation.</p>
<p>E. A training video demonstrating the procedures noted in this protocol can be found at the following link: AOMC | EMS / PHCOC Emergency Services (<a href="http://academyofmedicine.org">academyofmedicine.org</a>)</p>
<p>F. The swivel on the stopcock must be able to rotate 360 degrees.</p>

