---


---

<h1 id="positive-airway-pressure-procedure-protocol">Positive Airway Pressure Procedure Protocol</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Introduction</strong></p>
<p>A. Positive Airway Pressure (PAP) which entails Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) and Bilevel Positive Airway Pressure (BiPAP) work by “splinting” the airways with a constant pressure of air, which reduces the work of breathing. In CHF it forces the excess fluid out of the alveoli and interstitial space back into the vasculature which decreases venous return to the heart thereby lessening its workload. In COPD/asthma, it is thought to splint the constricted airways open allowing air exchange. CPAP/BiPAP can also be a palliative intervention for patients with DNR orders due to the non-invasion nature of pressure support versus ventilatory support.</p>
<ol>
<li>CPAP vs. BiPAP</li>
</ol>
<p>a. The difference between inspiratory and expiratory pressure in a BiPAP setting helps the patient to ventilate off carbon dioxide. If available, BiPAP is preferential in COPD patients. BiPAP may also provide benefit with work of breathing in fatigued patients.</p>
<p>B. Indications</p>
<ol>
<li>Age 16 years and older</li>
</ol>
<p>a. If indicated and size appropriate equipment is available for under 16 years old, consult medical control</p>
<ol start="3">
<li>
<p>Patient is awake and oriented.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient has the ability to maintain an open airway (GCS greater than 10).</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Systolic blood pressure above 90 mmHg.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>B. Contraindications</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Respiratory arrest.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Suspected pneumothorax.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient has a tracheostomy.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient is at risk for aspiration i.e.: vomiting, foreign body airway occlusion.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The patient is intubated. (The PAP device is not configured for use with ETT).</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Physical Findings</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Acute Respiratory Distress due to Asthma-COPD per Protocol M403 or Congestive Heart Failure per Protocol M404</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Respiratory Failure of any etiology if a valid DNR is present.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Other indications (ex: carbon monoxide poisoning) consult medical control</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>II. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. The PAP device should be applied as soon as it is indicated.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Ensure that the patient is on continuous cardiac monitor and pulse oximetry.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Select the CPAP device or CPAP mode on a dual function device to be used.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<ol start="3">
<li>If available, BiPAP device or BiPAP mode on a dual function device may be used by a Medic.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<ol start="4">
<li>
<p>Explain the procedure to the patient.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Ensure adequate oxygen supply and assemble PAP mask, circuit, and device.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Assemble required equipment and personnel for intubation in the event the patient deteriorates or is unable to tolerate PAP.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Attach quick connect device to a portable or fixed oxygen source.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Place an end-tidal capnography monitor device that will not break mask seal, if available</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Place the mask over the mouth and nose.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Secure the mask with straps.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Check for air leaks and adjust mask as needed.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>CPAP settings – follow device and medical director recommendations. Some prehospital devices may provide limited pressure information due to design. This limitation should not prevent use when indicated.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Standard starting settings are a minimum of 5-10 cmH2O</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Continue to coach patient to keep mask in place.</p>
<h2 id="medic-1">Medic</h2>
<ol start="14">
<li>If the patient is experiencing increasing anxiety versed 1-2 mg IV/IO/IM/IN every 5 minutes to a maximum of 10 mg may be administered</li>
</ol>
<p>a. The goal of versed is to decrease anxiety enough so that the patient tolerates PAP</p>
<ol start="15">
<li>BiPAP settings – follow device and medical director recommendations. Some prehospital devices may provide limited pressure information due to design. This limitation should not prevent use when indicated.</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Standard starting settings are 10 cmH20 for inspiratory positive airway pressure (IPAP) and 5 cmH2O for expiratory positive airway pressure (EPAP).</p>
<h2 id="all-2">ALL</h2>
<ol start="16">
<li>
<p>Reassess patient’s vital signs and response to PAP every 5 minutes</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Continue therapies as indicated by other protocols</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Do not break the mask seal to administer nitroglycerin (nitro lingual) SL.</p>
<p>b. Inhaled medications (ex: bronchodilators) may be administered in conjunction with the PAP device if capable.</p>
<ol start="18">
<li>
<p>If the patient’s status improves continue PAP until the patient is transferred to the care of the receiving hospital.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If patient’s status deteriorates discontinue PAP and assess the patient for the need to intubate.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Notify destination hospital that PAP has been used.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>PAP is only to be removed at the receiving hospital under the following circumstances.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>a. Personnel are present to transfer the patient to their equipment, or</p>
<p>b. The receiving ED PHYSICIAN is present and requests that PAP be discontinued.</p>

