---


---

<h1 id="hemorrhage-control-protocol">Hemorrhage Control Protocol</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Tourniquets</strong></p>
<p>A. Indications: Potentially life-threatening hemorrhage from a limb</p>
<p>B. Contraindications:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Non-life-threatening hemorrhage</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Hemorrhage from a junctional (axillary or groin), torso, or head / neck wound</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Definition: A compressive device used to stop all blood flow distal to the device. This includes improvised techniques as well as commercially available products. High quality, effective devices include the: Combat Application Tourniquet™, Special Operations Forces Tactical Tourniquet – Wide™, Emergency Military Tourniquet™, and the Mechanical Advantage Tourniquet™.</p>
<p>D. Protocol:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Tourniquet application may be performed by providers of all levels who have received specialized training in general tourniquet use and the specific device to be utilized.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The tourniquet should be placed 2-3 inches proximal to the site of hemorrhage. In some situations, it may be appropriate to place the tourniquet as proximal as possible on the limb for expediency. A tourniquet should never be placed on a joint.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Tourniquets may be placed over typical clothing. Pockets should be empty and overlying objects, such as holsters, should be removed.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The tourniquet should be tightened until hemorrhage is controlled. A second, preferably immediately proximal tourniquet may be required, particularly on the thigh.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Assure that the tourniquet is well secured and will not accidentally loosen.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Application time should be recorded.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Tourniquets may be loosened (do not remove, as reapplication may be required) if the situation necessitating their use has resolved, e.g., vehicle extrication completed, no longer in the care-under-fire setting. An alternative hemorrhage control technique should be in place first.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The receiving facility and providers MUST be made clearly aware of the use of a tourniquet and any tourniquets should be exposed and clearly marked with time of application/reapplication.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>II. Wound packing</strong></p>
<p>A. Indications: Potentially life-threatening hemorrhage from a wound to the groin, axilla, neck or limb.</p>
<p>B. Contraindications:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Non-life-threatening hemorrhage</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Hemorrhage treatable by tourniquet</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Definition: Using gauze to thoroughly fill a hemorrhaging penetrating wound cavity and produce hemostasis through moderate continuous pressure. This may be performed using standard sterile gauze, commercially available hemostasis products such as Combat Gauze™, Celox gauze™, Hemcon Chito Gauze™, or commercially available junctional tourniquet devices.</p>
<p>D. Protocol:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Wound packing may be performed by providers of all levels who have received specialized training in the technique.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Gauze should be placed as deeply in the wound as possible using a gloved digit and continuous pressure ensured. Excessive force is not necessary and may be harmful.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Manual direct pressure should be place over the packed wound for at least 3 minutes. Reassess and a pressure dressing should be applied.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Wound packing should never be removed in the prehospital setting.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The receiving facility and providers MUST be made clearly aware of the use of wound packing.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>III. Tranexamic Acid</strong></p>
<p>A. Refer to S506 Administration of Tranexamic Acid (txa).</p>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. Well-aimed direct pressure will control most hemorrhage. However, some situations necessitate more aggressive techniques discussed here, potentially as first-line interventions. Examples of such situations may include Tactical EMS operations, CPR in progress, mass casualty incidents, and active vehicle extrications.</p>
<p>B. Permanent damage to the limb caused by an appropriate tourniquet is nearly non-existent for tourniquets left in place for less than two hours.</p>
<p>C. An inadequately tightened tourniquet can actually worsen blood loss.</p>
<p>D. Periodic loosening of a tourniquet to “allow limb perfusion” should never be performed.</p>
<p>E. Packing a wound can lead to provider injury due to sharp objects in the wound cavity such as bone or projectile fragments.</p>
<p>F. Wound packing to the head or neck should only be done with caution. Packing should not occur into the cranial vault or orbits. Packing should never impede the airway.</p>

