---


---

<h1 id="intraosseous-io-access-and-infusion-guidelines">Intraosseous (IO) Access and Infusion Guidelines</h1>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>I. INTENTION</strong></p>
<p>A. To allow a means of vascular access when intravenous access (IV) is unavailable.</p>
<p>B. This protocol does not specify the type of device to be used, which may include, but not limited to EZ-IO, FAST1, Cook IO needles, Jamshidi IO needles, Bone Injection Gun. Agencies that elect to carry IO equipment must provide instruction on the device per manufacturer’s guideline. It is important to note, that the sites eligible for IO vary depending on the device used and Medical Director’s approval.</p>
<p><strong>II. I****NCLUSION</strong> <strong>C****RITERIA</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient requiring vascular access and unable to obtain IV access.</p>
<p>B. For patients deemed to be critical, entrapped, or for patients undergoing resuscitation it may be appropriate to place an IO without searching for an IV site at the discretion of the providers. Consider consult with medical control if unsure.</p>
<p><strong>III. CONTRAINDICATIONS</strong></p>
<p>A. Fracture or previous orthopedic procedure at site: consider alternatives.</p>
<p>B. Previous IO at the same site within 24 hours prior: consider alternatives.</p>
<p>C. Unable to distinguish site due to patient anatomy or significant edema: consider alternatives.</p>
<p>D. Infection at the insertion site: consider alternatives.</p>
<p>E. Patient is alert (relative contraindication pending device and provider discretion).</p>
<p><strong>IV. PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p>A. Explain procedure and apply anesthetic, if available, in alert patients.</p>
<p>B. Ascertain the site per Medical Director approval to be used (device specific) and prepare the site using sterile technique.</p>
<p>C. Follow all device specific protocols for insertion of catheter.</p>
<p>D. Confirm device placement and proper positioning. Attach extension tubing or device specific connection tubing.</p>
<p>E. Consider 2% Lidocaine (preservative free) for conscious patients prior to flushing or administering fluids/drugs via IO. Slowly administer 20-40mg 2% Lidocaine (1-2 mL for adults) or 0.5mg/kg 2% Lidocaine (pediatrics). Follow device recommendations.</p>
<p>F. Flush with 10 mL (adults) or 5 mL (pediatrics) fluids or follow device recommendation for flushing.</p>
<ol>
<li>It is important to flush the IO after attaching an extension, a common complication of poor flow is thought to be due to failure to immediately flush the catheter.</li>
</ol>
<p>G. Attach IV tubing, secure catheter, and check surrounding area for extravasation.</p>
<p>H. Establish a TKO rate for fluids when not administering medication/fluids.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>All medication administrations should be followed with a 10mL NaCl flush due to IO anatomy.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For continuous infusions, if flow rates are slower than desired with gravity only, utilize a pressure infusion device or BP cuff to increase rate.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If flow appears to have stopped, administer a 10mL NaCl flush to reopen catheter.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>I. Continuously monitor patient for complications to the procedure.</p>
<p><strong>NOTES:</strong></p>
<p>A. It is difficult to establish a specific detailed protocol due to the number and type of IO devices available. Agencies are recommended to publish a department specific protocol for the IO device they use.</p>
<p>B. IO access has been proven to be as effective as IV access for a broad range of medication/fluid administration.</p>
<ol>
<li>Dye injection studies in normal circulating studies have shown drugs reach the heart in 1 second from the proximal humerus or sternum and 4 seconds from the tibia. In cases of cardiac arrest, with proper CPR, it can take drugs 28 seconds from the sternum and 51 seconds from the tibia.</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Patients do not need to be unconscious for insertion but be wary of the psychological effects of the procedure of establishing IO access.</p>
<ol>
<li>Of the three major adult devices: EZ-IO, FAST1, and, Bone Injection Gun, none of the manufacturers list the patient’s level of consciousness as a contraindication to insertion. However, the FAST1 and EZ-IO both recommend local anesthetic prior, and all three devices recommend Lidocaine flush post insertion.</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Some devices have sites that are being used off-label (without FDA approval). Providers should only utilize sites that have received their Medical Director’s approval.</p>
<p>E. When transferring patient to another medical provider highlight the use of and ensure that they are familiar with the specific IO device used.</p>
<p>F. It is common practice to look/attempt IV access without success in at least 2 locations before establishing IO access but is not required.</p>
<p>G. All uses of IO devices should be reviewed as part of a department’s quality assurance process.</p>

