---


---

<h1 id="taserconducted-energy-weapon-emergencies">TASER/Conducted Energy Weapon Emergencies</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. Inclusion Criteria</strong></p>
<p>A. Any patient who has been subjected to a TASER or similar conducted energy weapon.</p>
<p><strong>II. Physical Findings</strong></p>
<p>A. Patient will likely be hand-cuffed and in Police custody.</p>
<p>B. May have TASER barb(s) embedded in skin or clothing.</p>
<ol>
<li>Barbs are similar to barbed style fishhooks and are extremely sharp. Use caution when handling to avoid contaminated needle stick exposure.</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Minor/inactive bleeding and redness may be present at/near site of TASER barb penetration.</p>
<p>D. May present with secondary injuries associated with an un-supported fall such as, but not limited to:</p>
<ol>
<li>Lacerations, abrasions, bruising or possibly stress fractures associated with involuntary muscle contractions.</li>
</ol>
<p>E. Altered level of consciousness.</p>
<ol>
<li>If needed refer to SB201 Altered Level of Consciousness.</li>
</ol>
<p>F. May be anxious, agitated or combative.</p>
<ol>
<li>If needed refer to M407 Psychiatric Protocol or M408 Restraint Protocol.</li>
</ol>
<p>G. Chest pain and/or respiratory distress are not commonly associated symptoms but may present.</p>
<ol>
<li>If needed refer to SB203 Chest Pain or SB202 Respiratory Distress protocols.</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>III. Protocol</strong></p>
<p>A. Assure that scene is safe and patient has been restrained by Police or EMS, if appropriate.</p>
<p>B. Maintain airway and administer oxygen to correct hypoxia &lt;95%.</p>
<p>C. Assess for spinal injury.</p>
<ol>
<li>Refer to T704 Spinal Motion Restriction Protocol.</li>
</ol>
<p>D. Obtain vital signs.</p>
<ol>
<li>Pulse, B/P and respiratory rate may be initially elevated but should return to age specific normal ranges within a reasonable time.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<ol start="2">
<li>Apply cardiac monitor if warranted; refer to appropriate cardiac protocol if dysrhythmia exists.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="all-1">ALL</h2>
<p>E. Assess patient’s neurological status; examine for signs/symptoms of a potential head injury.</p>
<p>F. Complete a secondary exam, looking for secondary injuries associated with an un-supported fall.</p>
<ol>
<li>Bandage, dress, splint or otherwise treat all injuries/wounds as appropriate.</li>
</ol>
<p>G. If patient again becomes agitated or combative; consider physical or chemical restraint as outlined in M408 Restraint Protocol.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Involve Police personnel when restraining.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Be aware that patient may be exhibiting behavior consistent with <strong>Life-Threatening Agitation</strong>, refer to notes below and M407 Psychiatric Protocol.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>H. Removal of TASER probe barb:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Prior to TASER probe barb removal, patient must be cooperative and non-combative.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Cartridge must be removed from TASER gun body by Police prior to touching TASER probe barb(s) or removal from patient. TASER wires should not be cut or pulled from probe barb assembly unless absolutely necessary for patient care.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Patient with TASER barb embedded in eye, eye lid, female breast tissue, genitalia, face, neck, spine, hands, feet, joints, or other body areas of concern should be transported, accompanied by Police, for removal by hospital staff. Pregnant patients who are impacted by TASER barbs should be transported to the hospital, accompanied by Police, for evaluation.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>If a TASER barb removal tool is available, this is the preferred method to assist in removing barbs.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Grasp the probe portion of the barb assembly firmly (with gloved hand, forceps, or manufacturer removal tool) holding skin taut between two fingers. At a 90° angle to the skin, quickly remove the probe barb from the patient’s skin and bandage wounds accordingly.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Probe barb(s) should be inspected to ensure assembly is complete. Police will be able to assist in confirming entire barb was removed from the patient as length may vary by model.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Once removed, TASER barb(s) should be considered a contaminated sharp and handled accordingly. The TASER cartridge usually contains a slot/hole to insert the deployed barb for safe storage.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Deployed barbs shall be given to Police. If not given to the Police, they should be disposed of in an appropriate sharps container.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>Notes:</strong></p>
<p>A. Refer to M407 – Psychiatric Protocol.</p>
<p>B. A key symptom to the potential onset of sudden death from life-threatening agitation is “instant tranquility.” The patient who was initially very violent and combative suddenly becomes calm and docile. This is a serious and ominous sign; patient should be constantly monitored and transported by EMS for evaluation,.</p>

