---


---

<h1 id="mechanical-ventilator-setup-and-management">Mechanical Ventilator Setup and Management</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. STANDARDS</strong></p>
<p>A. This protocol is intended to apply to the emergency transport of patients requiring immediate medical care and evaluation. It is not intended to apply to the non-emergent transport of chronically ventilated patients.</p>
<p>B. There are different models of mechanical ventilators on the market. Medics must be trained on the specific model used by their department.</p>
<p>C. EMS providers should only be responsible for use of the ventilator that their agency provides and trains with. In other words, the EMS provider should not be responsible for a patient’s own ventilator or a ventilator from a facility where a patient is being transported from.</p>
<p>D. There are situations where the best thing for patient care is for the patient to be maintained on their own ventilator. These situations should be rare and would typically be situations where a patient is on a ventilator at home.</p>
<p>E. If the reason for transport involves an issue related to the patient’s ventilator, the patient should be removed from their ventilator and manually ventilated.</p>
<p>F. If the reason for transport is a non-respiratory issue, the patient may benefit from staying on their ventilator. If there is a family member or care provider that has been trained on the patient’s ventilator, then the patient may be transported on their ventilator with that care provider responsible for the patient’s ventilator.</p>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<p>G. Call for ALS backup for any patient on a ventilator.</p>
<p>H. If the patient’s ventilator has malfunctioned or the patient is in respiratory distress remove them from the ventilator and manually ventilate.</p>
<p>I. If the patient is stable on the ventilator it is acceptable to start transport with the patient on their ventilator if there is a family member or care provider trained to monitor the ventilator who can be responsible for the ventilator during transport.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>II. INDICATIONS</strong></p>
<p>A. Age greater than or equal to 16 years.</p>
<p>B. Mechanical ventilation may be initiated after a patient has been intubated.</p>
<p>C. Mechanical ventilation may be continued if it was initiated prior to EMS contact. Refer to M415 for continuation of pre-existing medical devices.</p>
<p><strong>III. CONTRAINDICATIONS</strong></p>
<p>A. Cardiac arrest is relative contraindication, if short of manpower and use of mechanical ventilation would facilitate patient care then refer to “Six Dial Setup” in the notes.</p>
<p><strong>IV. INITIAL VENTILATOR SETUP</strong></p>
<p>A. If patient has been on ventilator prior to EMS assuming care, it is appropriate to continue ventilator settings that were previously established.</p>
<p>B. There are many ventilator strategies that exist. Consideration of all these strategies based on clinical scenario is felt to be unnecessary for the brief duration of mechanical ventilator support during EMS care. This initial setup is basic by design.</p>
<p>C. Mode – Assist Control</p>
<p>D. Rate – 12 breaths per minute</p>
<p>E. FiO2 – 100%</p>
<p>F. PEEP – 5 cm H2O</p>
<p>G. Tidal Volume – 450ml for female patient and 500ml for male patient</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>These volumes are meant to reflect volume of 7ml/kg for the “average size” adults</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>There are charts that would allow more specific tidal volumes based on height and ideal body weight for males and females. Asking medics to estimate height and to calculate ideal body weight seems unnecessary since these settings will be temporary and can be adjusted by provider at receiving facility.</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>H. All patients placed on mechanical ventilator must have continuous end tidal CO2 monitoring performed.</p>
<p><strong>V. VENTILATOR ADJUSTMENTS AND ETCO2 MONITORING</strong></p>
<p>A. Ventilator adjustments are usually made based on analysis of arterial blood gas.</p>
<p>B. Ideal EtCO2 is 35-45mmHG for patients who are not in cardiac arrest. If your intubated patient has EtCO2 outside this range for greater than 10 minutes after being placed on the ventilator you should consider contacting medical control for recommendations to adjust ventilator settings.</p>
<p>C. Goal EtCO2 is &gt;10mmHG during CPR, an abrupt rise in EtCO2 is often an indication of ROSC</p>
<p>D. If the medic has questions or concerns about ventilator settings during transport, they should contact medical control for further instruction.</p>
<p><strong>VI. WHAT TO DO IN VENTILATOR EMERGENCY</strong></p>
<p>A. First thing to do if the patient has declining oxygen saturations or change in ventilatory status is to take them off the mechanical ventilator and ventilate manually.</p>
<p>B. Next consider potential causes of the ventilator emergency using the DOPE is acronym.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>D – Dislodged or disconnected tube</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>O – Obstruction</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>P – Pneumothorax</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>E – Equipment failure</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p>C. Once the patient stabilizes and problem has been addressed the patient may be placed back on the mechanical ventilator.</p>
<p><strong>NOTES:</strong></p>
<p>A. Six Dial Setup</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>Mode – Volume Control Ventilation</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>PEEP – 0 cm H2O</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Tidal Volume – 8mL/lg</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>FIO2 – 100%</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Respiratory Rate – 10 Breaths per Minute</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Maximum Peak Inspiratory Pressure (Pmax Alarm) – 60cm of H2O</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Ventilation Trigger – Off</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Adequate Inspiratory Time – 1 second</p>
</li>
</ol>
<p><strong>REFERENCES:</strong></p>
<p>A. Sahu AK, Timilsina G, Mathew R, Jamshed N, Aggarwal P. “Six-dial Strategy”-Mechanical Ventilation during Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation. Indian J Crit Care Med. 2020;24(6):487-489. doi:10.5005/jp-journals-10071-23464</p>

