---


---

<h1 id="sedation-after-intubation">Sedation after Intubation</h1>
<h2 id="all">ALL</h2>
<p><strong>I. GOAL OF PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p>A. There is a clear need for EMS providers to have the capability to sedate patients after intubation. This is an appropriate intervention for the benefit of the patient to treat the discomfort and anxiety that accompanies intubation.</p>
<p>B. Sedation makes it easier to ventilate the patient, can potentially decrease oxygen demand and makes it less likely that the patient will dislodge the endotracheal tube</p>
<p><strong>II. CONSIDERATIONS</strong></p>
<p>G. Inadequate post intubation management leads to increased pain, anxiety and possibly increased oxygen demand.</p>
<p>H. Post intubation medication management should include a pain medication and a sedative.</p>
<p>I. Pain should be assessed early and often.</p>
<p>J. Medications for pain and sedation are often not immediately available on arrival to the emergency department so medics should continue appropriate dosing up to the transition of care.</p>
<p><strong>III. INCLUSION CRITERIA</strong></p>
<p>A. Intubated patient is requiring pain medication and sedation</p>
<p>B. Patient Intubated with Endotracheal Tube and tube appropriately secured</p>
<p>C. ET tube position has been confirmed</p>
<p>D. Patient monitoring has been established and must include – Cardiac Monitor, Continuous Pulse Ox and Continuous ETCO2</p>
<p><strong>IV. EXCLUSION CRITERIA</strong></p>
<p>A. Age – no age exclusions</p>
<p>B. Allergies – to medications in protocol</p>
<p>C. Patients that are completely unresponsive do not require sedation but patients that have previously been given a paralytic agent should be given appropriate sedation.</p>
<h2 id="emt">EMT</h2>
<p><strong>V. ANY INTUBATED PATIENT MUST BE UNDER THE CARE OF AN ALS PROVIDER</strong></p>
<p>A. While sedation can only be administered by paramedics, after an advanced airway is placed and confirmed, basic EMTs may initiate transport and request ALS intercept if an ALS provider is not immediately available on scene.</p>
<p>B. EMTs must ensure appropriate monitoring and documentation are continued during transport until care is transferred to ALS or the receiving facility.</p>
<h2 id="medic">Medic</h2>
<p><strong>VI. PROTOCOL</strong></p>
<p>A. Confirm successful placement of ET tube</p>
<p>B. Initiate and continue required monitoring</p>
<p>C. Establish and maintain vascular access (IV or IO)</p>
<p>D. Assess patient’s level of alertness and pain before and after medication administration, document any change in patient’s condition and/or every 10 minutes</p>
<p>E. Administer Medication(s) per the following table, administer follow up doses as necessary</p>
<p>F. Notify ED of incoming intubated patient and notify ED staff of sedation that was administered at the time of patient transfer of care</p>
<p>G. All doses below are for administration in the time frame outlined, as needed to maintain sedation.</p>

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>SBP &gt;150 or at risk for hypertension: Examples: stroke, stimulant overdose</th>
<th></th>
<th>SBP &lt;100 or at risk of hypotension: Examples: trauma, sepsis, shock, asthma</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Fentanyl 1mcg/kg (max single dose 200mcg) IV/IO every 5 minutes  -OR-  Morphine 0.1mg/kg (max single dose 10mg) IV/IO every 10 minutes  -PLUS-  Midazolam 0.05mg/kg (max single dose 5mg) IV/IO every 5 minutes</td>
<td>Patients that are normotensive who are not determined to be at risk of complications of hypertension or hypotension may be treated with either medication regiment.</td>
<td>Ketamine 2mg/kg IV/IO, then 1mg/kg every 5 minutes.   Appropriate resuscitation should be initiated based on patient condition.  It is acceptable to use push dose epi to offset the hemodynamic effects of sedation.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
